O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, very dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine along with its fulfillment, and I have made an end through its explanations and through its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hand, namely surgery.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of the hand is very little treated in our region and is unknown everywhere, the knowledge of it has been lost and only small descriptions in books by the ancients remain, written from the hands themselves.Et si li fuers et la science de cest uvre ne demore pas en nostre region, il demore en l’autre parti de le monde, car il ne peut diez ne poer ne paitre que de ceus qui conssent li science de li corps et de li mebrues.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And because the strength and science of this work do not remain in our region, they remain in the other parts of the world, for it cannot exist without those who possess the knowledge of the body and its functions.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	I think it is appropriate to animate this treatise together with the order of this text according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the tools of cautery, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation for it, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And one who undertakes this must excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as long as he knows the judgment of the members, and forms and conjunctions, and separations of bones, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and veins, and the number of ears, and the movement and of their blood vessels.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason Hypocrites says that what is known by name is little, and with the work is less; and the same is true of the art of the hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously discussed, must be careful that he does not slip into error and harm people; just as I have seen many of those who meddle in this science and then abandon it without knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish physician who lanced an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and lanced the arteries in her neck; so much blood flowed out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another physician who treated a stone in the bladder of a man, and the stone was large; he took out with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if they cut it out he would surely die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another patient who received treatment for a broken leg, and with the break had a wound; and the ignorant surgeon bound up the break above the wound with tight bandages, leaving no room for swelling, and left it thus with a fixed end; and he commanded that it not be unbound. And thus it remained until the leg, foot, and toes swelled and came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to loosen the leg; and when I had loosened it, he was at ease and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	However, the corruption had already been confirmed in the limb, and I could not heal it; and the corruption continued to spread through the limb until the entire leg was lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another patient who had a wound, and then it became inflamed due to the wickedness of his lord.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a ulcer, when it is clear of melancholy humor, one should not touch it with iron unless it is in such a place that one can completely remove all that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear son, you need to know that the work of the hand is divided into two parts: there is work where there is danger in many situations; and I will show in each section of this book where there is danger and peril.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	It is necessary that you guard against this, so that the foolish multitudes cannot speak ill of you. Take up your weapons in confidence, and undertake your maladies lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave behind terrible diseases of grief and pain; and remove your armor from whatever causes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may pass from this world to one of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in some of his warnings: "Do not take seriously any illness that you are called a fool for.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have arranged this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medical cauteries, and it is ordered from the head to the feet. It includes the forms of instruments and all that is necessary for the practice.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping, wounds, extracting arrows, and similar things. It includes the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twisting, and similar things; it is ordered from the head to the feet, and concerns the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	So that we may remember the work, I must describe the nature of each humor and its harmful qualities.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of humor, and their harmfulness, are the most lengthy speech and subtle science, and the secret responses; and the sages spoke about it at length, and agreed upon it; and I am satisfied with a little of their words, for I dread their lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery helps universally in all humors where there is matter, be it in two humors: namely, hot humor without matter, and dry humor without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In a hot and dry complexional matter, some people said that cautery was a great help; while others said the contrary - that cautery is of no use for a disease that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured by heat nor dryness; and those who said otherwise, claimed that cautery helps a great deal with hot and dry diseases that originate in the human body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find the body to be cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found this to be true through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	But nevertheless, let only those intervene who have experimented with this and who know through long usage the treatment with cauteries, and the diversity of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and their outcomes and the timing; we are not afraid of other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the doctors agreed and concurred with the cautery treatment.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my son, that cautery brings fire together with the secrets of healing, and is of greater goodness than burning cautery of medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not spread beyond the cooked member, nor harm any other part if only slightly applied.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Burning remedies pass from one member to another by dispersing, and bring diseases of grief and pain to the member; and sometimes they kill the patient. Fires, because of their intensity and the goodness of their substance, do not do this if there is not an excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this to be true through experiment and through the longevity of service and study that I have devoted to the art; and because of this, I excuse myself for the length of my speech, for it does not please me to take away from you the secret that is reserved for fire, and the quality of its work, describing how it cures illnesses in bodies, as the philosopher explains in his demonstration. So receive this in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed upon what time the cauteries should be performed, and chose a propitious moment.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the harmfulness underneath is removed by the aid of cautery; and especially if the cautery is for necessary, urgent pains that cannot wait until a more convenient time arrives, so that greater harm does not come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear son, as the foolish multitude believe; for a disease that is healed by cautery does not return, and they say it does, but it is not so as they imagine, because cauteries are not medicines that move the complexion, and dry up the humors which cause pain, and are better than remedies for their quick action, and for the virtue of their action and their lordship.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease may sometimes return according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the disease and its power; and the superfluities are accumulated in him through the digestion of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered where there is little superfluity and moisture, such as tooth cauteries for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return, but that rarely happens.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterization is considered the last resort of medicine; but it is true, nevertheless. They do not believe that cauterization works better than medicine, but their intentions are false. Cauterization is the last resort of medicine because when we administer healing methods for any illness and they do not work, then we turn to cauterization, and it does work.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the opinion of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauterization with a golden instrument is gentler than with iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and its high value; and they said that cauterization does not cause swelling, but this is not true, as I have experimented and found that it is true in some people. Cauterization with gold is better than with iron, just as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	However, when you heat an instrument of gold, you cannot tell when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down immediately; and if it is heated too much, it will melt in the fire; and thus there are many problems.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this, we use a fire cautery, which we have made appropriate for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have arranged this chapter from the head to the feet, so that the road is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of the olive-oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is useful for moisture and coldness in the head, and there are two reasons for its use: one is because of a disease called "soda", and the other is due to many humors descending from the head to the eyes and ears, as well as for numerous ailments such as pain in the teeth and throat, and especially for diseases caused by coldness, such as paralysis, soda (a type of stroke), and similar conditions.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the patient is purged with a cleansing, solvative medicine for 3 or 4 nights, depending on what the strength and age and condition of the disease can endure; then have the head of the patient shaved.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then have him sit cross-legged in your lap, and place his hands on his thighs; then place the root of your palm between the roots of his nose between his two eyes; and where it will come to your middle finger, then cut, then scorch with the cautery which is called 'olive', of which this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the spot marked with ink, and move your hand up and down while twisting; then lift your hand gently, and inspect the area if you see the bone slightly protruding; and if not, then re-cauterize until you do as I have instructed; then take a small piece of silk, and insert soft cotton inside it, and place it over the spot, and leave it for 3 days; then apply an ointment called 'tetrafarmaçon' to the wound until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if you wish, let the wound remain open for a longer time, as the more it is exposed, the better it purges; and therefore help to promote this with leeches.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some say that one must let the cautery burn until part of the bone is scorched, and then one should scrape off what is burned from the bone, and it will be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one must let the cautery burn so long and press so hard that one dislodges the bone as much as a needle that women put in their fuse to draw out fluids; then one should leave the wound open for a long time, then cure it and bandage it.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And I do not consider either of these two methods of cauterization to be good in all cases, except for those in which there is fear; and I would rather leave it alone, because the shoulder joint becomes weakened through natural processes, as we see in other joints; and likewise when the shoulder joint of the sick person is weakened by nature, and the first appearance of cautery seems better and gentler to me, therefore I apply it together with a salve.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	from the old pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When in the whole head there is chronic pain that lasts a long time, one should use herbs and pills for the patient's pain, and also purgatives for the head, and oils and plasters; and if they perform the cautery we mentioned earlier and it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the sick person is not too hot in nature and not too cold; then cauterize it under the fire cautery we mentioned earlier for a short time.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After that, cauterize each horn of the head right up to the bone as we said before, and make another cautery in the place where the windpipe is located; this is a spot where ventouses are usually placed. Use a light touch so you don't go too deep; the patient will feel great pain from this cautery compared to the others, but I will speak of that later. The cauteries on the horns should be finer than those used on the middle part of the head, and here is the technique:
dou cautere dou chief	of the cautery on the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain occurs in the head and the disease extends to the eye, and the shoulders are purged with purifying medicines, and the other treatments I have described in the division of diseases have been performed, but nothing helps: then cauterize according to two methods, that is, with hot iron and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery with hot iron: take a clove of garlic, remove the skin and cover it with a piece of cloth about two inches in diameter; then make an incision where the pain is located in such a way that you can place the garlic underneath the skin. And when it is placed, tie it tightly and leave it for twelve hours; then untie it and draw out the garlic, leaving the wound open for two or three days; then put on a linen cloth soaked in butter until it heals.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the wound is healed, use an ointment until it is completely cured; and if you see fit, apply some of the burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth chapter on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The cautery with iron is as follows.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery, of which there is the shape.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	It is called "cauterization" because the head is formed in the shape of a dome with a slight curve, and in the middle has a small appearance; and it is placed over the painful area, and you hold your hand and slightly turn the instrument, so that half of the thickness of the skin is burned; then lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is forced away, and an abundance of blood flows.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	Afterwards, put cotton in the wound and leave it for three days; then put moistened cotton on the area, and treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this vein with the cautery called "cultellare", cauterize all of its tip, and be careful not to cover the artery in this vein which is not old.
de emigraine	of veins
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you cure veins as we have previously discussed in the sections on diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the previously mentioned cauteries of medicine and fire do not help, then you must heat the cautery called  "cultellare" until it is white; and sign thus over the painful area a line half a finger long, and lift your hand once, and press so that you do not cover the artery and it reaches the bone; and be careful of the mandible which becomes mute when one chews, and let the nerve have no regard for the mute and let no spasms come to the patient, and be careful of blood flowing from the artery when it is cut, or cutting has great fear and especially for one who is not experienced and untried; and leave the wound open in the middle; but I will tell you how to stop the flow of blood from an artery when it is cut, and I will show you where it opens in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the face as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery which we have described in the chapter on extracting an artery, with a cautery that has two blades; this cautery is better than that one and more effective.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	from pain in the ears due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ear persists despite treatment with solutive medicines and other remedies that we have described in the previous chapter, and the pain does not go away, then heat this cautery called «poins», which has the following shape:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After puncturing all around the affected ear, or both ears if the pain is in both, and then move slightly up from the root of the ear where you have marked the area to be treated; and administer 10 punctures around each ear; afterward, treat the area until it heals.
de la torture de la bouche	of the mouth's torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	There is no cure by cautery for those diseases that cause fluid build-up, as we have said in the sections on diseases; and do not perform cauterization on conditions that arise from dryness and nerve swelling.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this type of torture that involves fluid build-up and discharge from the head, along with gargling and purging, if this does not work, then you must cauterize the patient using three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another just below the temple, and the third on the junction between the two lips. Apply the cautery to the area that appears healthy, and also cauterize the top of the ear, about a finger's width below the horn-like protrusion at the top of the head, and likewise cauterize the temple for about a finger's length. Allow the cautery to remain in place until half of the brain is scorched. The shape of the cautery instrument should be as follows:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is similar in shape to the scalpel described earlier, but it should be slightly thinner, and the blade should be a bit wider. Treat the area as I have described before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but it does not help, and the patient has a fever, then do four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one at the site called "vassels" as we have said before; and do the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach, and let it be treated as we have said before.
de litargie	of quicksilver
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient large and purifying pills to the brain; then shave the head of the patient all over, and put on the ointment of mustard seed which is written about in the treatise on ointments; and this is the way of the cautery: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is healed thus, it is good; and if not, do three cauteries in the middle of the head, descending just to the neck, and have one inch of space between each cautery; and cure him as the others, and if you see a need, and the patient is suffering, do one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, do two more on the two horns, and cure him as before. And let the cautery be that which is called  "olive oil", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	from the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to cleanse the head of hair and anything else we have mentioned earlier. Then, the patient should be laid down, and cauterized in the head, and on each horn, one behind, and three on the spine of the neck; and if you require more, and the body is moist and the patient can endure it, and the illness is severe, then he should receive four cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave them until the heart burns the most, then lift your hand. After healing the wound, the cautery known as "olive" which we mentioned earlier, should be applied.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use cautery except for those who are phlegmatic; it is first necessary to cleanse the brain of hair and other things that we mentioned in the division when the illness is great and suffering, taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot endure it, make him gargle and chew, cleansing the brain often with good meat; after the king, wash the head in milk, and do to him .i. cautery according to what we have said before, and .i. cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the disease is strong and忍耐, make cauteries to him as I have said to one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the disease is in an infant, make to him 1 subtle cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When through the cause of melancholy there are corrupted humours and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with mild cauteries as we have said for one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if through the cause of melancholy there is the surplus declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink by which the brain is cleansed, according to what it says before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After raising the head of the patient, make a turnip well and in the shape of a circle, place it on the head; cross the patient's arms, and hold them tightly from all sides; then present the linen, and wet it with the butter of old goats; heat gently over the fire so that the patient can bear it; remove the turnip from inside the head, and let it cool; do this for the patient once a week until he is healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you want to cauterize it all over by making multiple points on the whole cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This cautery method moistens the brain greatly; then place wet cotton in butter and lamb's fat on top.
de l’awe des eulz	of their eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When eye disease first appears in the eyes through the signs that I have described in the division, then begin and give the patient drink that cleanses the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make him sweat in the bath several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After commanding him to look down, and cauterizing his head, and making two cauteries on the two temples if the sinuses of the eye are both together, or one if they are separate; and closing all the veins and arteries underneath the heart, and making the cauteries long according to the width of the temple; and be careful of blood letting, and if you see too much blood emerging, then stop it as best you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and the incision, the cauterization how you should do it; and sometimes a cauterization or hatchet is done underneath the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	where tears come from the body
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears from the eyes are old and habitual, and are on the veins, or among the arteries that are in the appearance of the forehead outside; and one sees that it is from cold phlegmatic superfluities, then he makes the cautery that I said at the beginning of the eye: .1 cauterization in the middle of the forehead, and .2 cauteries on the two temples, and .2 cauterizations or hatchets underneath the two bones; and if there is a need for more, then he cauterizes bleeding above the eyebrow with a small cautery all around.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	through which the body cries inside them
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three nights of poultices; after that, bleed the head, and cauterize the middle of the cautery with olive oil; and make two cauteries, called "clavilis", on the two sorces, a little under the hair; and be careful not to touch the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery, which is called "olive".
de coi ci est li forme:	of which there is the shape:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see two warts as long as the warts are; and do not let go of your hand until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that points the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes the hairs of the eyes are converted to warts, and prick the eye, and they make cauteries according to two manners: that is to say, of fire, or of burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then place the patient in a warm bath; afterwards draw on paper a figure that is as the leaf of the myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be amongst the hairs; then place wet cotton soaked in egg white and parsley juice over the eye, then heat the cautery from which the shape comes:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterize on the figure that you have marked little by little many times, until the skin is burned in that place; and the sign of the health of the work is when you see the paper drawn back, and the hairs raised at the edge of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus. For three days, then place wet cotton in butter until the burn is healed; afterwards treat with ointment until it is cured.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards the hairs come again, and the paper becomes soft, then repeat the cautery on that same place, as you did before; and if the hair is lost, then cauterize until the paper returns to its natural state, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cautery of medicine that burns is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow until they are long and even; then make on parchment the shape of the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and quicklime, of each a third, and grind them together well; and make it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it on the shape you made as the leaf of myrtle, and put on the paper of the eyes; and if the illness is in one eye only, then do this in one, and if in both, also; and place under the eye wet cotton soaked in egg white; and let the head of the patient be in a warm bath, and place your hand showing over the medicine, and press one moment and release it every time that the patient feels biting from the medicine, for it bites like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the bite is passed, lift the eyelid, and inspect if you see the paper lifted as it was by the constraint of fire or by incision; and if so, all is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, then apply more medicine to the area where the medicine has not taken effect, until your actions are equal and the eyes are set right; then place wet cotton in butter until the burns are cooled, after which clean the wound with a salve called "diaphénis" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to take care of your work well with great care that it does not leak medicine into the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterward, and the hair pricks in the eye, then restart the medicine on the area that is softened by the paper properly, just as you did before; cure it until it heals; and this is the form of the myrtle twig:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that people's eyes vary in size and shape, and according to this, your constraints should be adjusted; and do not rely on the correct method for someone who is an expert in this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	on the treatment of fistulas by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you are treating a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not helping, then you should use cautery according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head in your lap; and have the assistant hold their head between your hands so that it does not move or tilt back. Then wet cotton with egg white or juice of parsley and apply it to the eye. Next, heat the cautery which is made of iron: it should be shaped like a pen nib, curved at one end and pointed at the other, but any shape will do for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Then press the fistula if it is open and draw out the pus, and dry it. If it is closed, pierce it and draw out the fluid. Next, place the hot cautery firmly on the flesh around the eye, holding your hand steadily on the cautery near the eyelid so that your hand does not shake. Place the cautery in the grease of the eye and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of cautery as far as the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then restart cautery again once more, and if you need to do so, repeat it every three days; after three days, apply soft cotton soaked in butter, and cure it with a drying ointment until it heals, and if 40 days pass and it is not healed, apply an abrasive medicine as far as the bone is exposed; and treat the king according to how he fares.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula which some of the ancients spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Examine the fistula, and mark its location; then insert into the opening a thin needle, made of a material that it can be seen with.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make it to the size of a pea; and hold your hand or the wood firmly so that the patient does not move, so that when the pitch melts it does not run into their eye; and one should put on the eye of the patient wet cotton in vinegar or in wine: the pitch will then close the fistula, and heal it miraculously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization we have described, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then one must open the vein and draw the fistula back into the body of the vein according to what is appropriate in its own place.Et si li fistule sont en la main, ou en la pie, ou en autrui membrez del corps, si covient aministrer pertus au neif qui sont approchiez de li fistule:
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times cracks occur in the lips that are called "hair," especially in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have described in the sections above, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small scalpel according to this shape:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it quickly in the cracks until it reaches the bottom; after that, treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or the palate, or the roots of the teeth, after it makes swelling and pus and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in sections, and it does not help: then you should have a cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand until the hot iron comes to the bottom of it, and in the rear; and do this once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in treatments, until it is healed; and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if not, then you must expose the site and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	of the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine and it does not help, then put the head of the patient in your lap; after heat the cautery whose form will come below in such a way that you place a cane on the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside until it reaches the root of the tooth; then lift your hand and reheat the cautery according to your will; after fill the mouth of the patient with salt water, and let him gargle for an hour and spit it out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way, a tooth that was loose is made firm, and the gums are made soft and moist, and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of toothache
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from coldness, or there is coldness or whiteness, and medical remedies are ineffective, then there is need for cautery in two ways: cautery with butter and cautery with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery with butter is such that you heat butter from a cow, and the end in a spoon made of iron or bronze; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and moisten it in the butter, and apply it to the aching tooth until it cools; and do this repeatedly until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. And if you see that the butter-soaked wool and cotton are cold, and apply it to the aching tooth, and place a hot iron on top until the fire reaches the gum around the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cauteries together with fire are such that you take a cane of iron or bronze, and it is thick so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient; after heating the cautery, causing the form to come out afterwards, place it on the fistula and hold your hand until the cautery cools; do this often, for the pain will be removed that day itself or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And the patient must fill his mouth with good butter when he is about to undergo this cautery, and then he should lean forward. And this is how the cautery is performed:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery for the eye, according to what you can afford; and this is the shape of the rod:
des scrophules	of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula is caused by cold moisture and is not responsive to digestion through medicine, then heat the cautery iron according to the instructions that follow, and have two openings for the smoke to escape from the other side of the cautery; and place the hot cautery iron on the abscess once, where it is needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, use a cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days; then place wet cotton dipped in butter over the burn until the wound is healed; after which, treat the wound with ointments and bandages until it is completely cured.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture overwhelms the channels of the stomach, and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then the patient should first be purged with solubilizing medicines; then have him cauterized at the root of the throat, and be careful not to go any higher than the throat, and do not burn the heart but just a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then have him cauterized at the junction of the neck and head, at the base of the spine, and use a cautery called "clavicle," as described earlier; and treat the area until it is healed, as we have said before.
de la toust	of the tongue
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all diseases of the lungs are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is old, then make two cauteries on the chest in open wounds; and another cautery between the breasts, using the cautery called 'clavicle' as described earlier.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see fit, have him cauterized in punctures with the entire cautery called "points," as the form is described earlier for ear diseases; and the points should be up to 30 or so, all around.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After curing the wound according to what has been said before, let there be three cauteries according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for this reason cauteries are gentler when you do them three times.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, press on the patient's back and side; then lift the heart which is within the breast with your left hand's fingers; and if the joint is dislocated within, heat the cautery which has two knots of wool, here is its shape:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the head until it penetrates to the bone, and the figure of the cautery will be four cauteries; and for this reason there is made a cautery with the cautery that has three nerves, and so the figures of cauterization are six cauteries; and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery that has three nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is placed on this one nerve so there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After putting the broiled porridge on the cautery, let the patient rest and not move the limb for a long time until it is well healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, not much happens, therefore make the cautery on the thick part of the cautery clave, or a lot of cauteries in puncturing.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	Because the joint is closed and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When there are chills and a lot of moisture in the stomach, drawing it out to his complexion, and many catharres multiply in him, and he is not helped by the usual methods of treatment, then the patient should be placed on his back, extending his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	After this, make three cauteries, one under the heel of the foot according to the quantity of a bean, with all the cautery clave, and two cauteries on either side so that the shape of the cauteries is at three angles, and there is such space between them that they are not joined together when they bend pus; and let the cauteries be so deep that they bleed the two parts of the chest, and let the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see fit to cauterize a large area of the stomach according to this form; and for those who fear this cautery, cauterize in small dots and sign on the stomach one dot according to the amount you wish to go in; then cauterize with the whole cautery which is called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure of the ulcer that we have discussed earlier, until it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver experiences pain from cold and moisture and excessive windiness, when it is out of its natural state due to excesses; and the patient is treated for this as we have discussed in previous sections, but if it does not help, then the patient should be placed on his back; and three cauteries are marked according to this form, figure, and quantity on the liver, avoiding the hypogastric region where the gut of the human arises; and there should be the thickness of a thumb between each cautery; and the cauteries should be long and thin, and do not press your hand too hard as you do it all over the liver; and only half of the chest should be burned, and the patient should be lying on his back; and if he cannot lie flat, then he should be semi-reclined, stretching his legs and lifting his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you wish, cauterize with the cautery of the knife, if you are skillful and wise in the art, and be careful not to scorch the heart, for you would dry out the whole body; and let it not go as far as the bowels, for the heart is a very delicate place there, and you can tell by looking.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know whether it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the pain is not too intense; but if it is in the membrane, the pain is violent.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then when this treatment is applied to the eyes, the patient should be reclined on his back; and then sign with oil on the location of the abscess, and then heat the cautery which is similar in shape to a radish, from which the form of the tool comes:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize with the cautery until the ulcer is burned, and comes to a head, so that all pus is discharged; after the cure, according to the method of washing, until it is healed; and no one should use this cautery except those who have studied long in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have sometimes been cured.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore he can safely operate, and in any case it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the cautery for pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one must do cautery for pleurisy with roots of aristologus, and in this manner: take a long, dry root of aristologus, as thick and as long as your fingers; moisten it in oil, heat it in the fire, and cauterize with 1 large cautery between the sternum and the collarbone, and 2 small cauteries further down into the part that is under the beard; and 2 cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, declining a little backward; and 1 cautery in the navel, and 1 other on the stomach, and 1 between the 2 shoulders, and 2 at the sides of the navel, deflecting the cautery that is between the 2 shoulders; and do not press your hand, but do it gently, as if you were applying a perfumed ointment.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And some ancient authorities say that a cautery should be made like a razor, heated and placed between the ribs, until it reaches the abscess; if there is any pain, as we have said in the case of an abscess in the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this operation there is fear of death for the patient, or a fistula occurs which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of warts with what we have said about the divisions of treatment, and it does not help, then they resort to three methods of cauterization, all of which are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of these, one method is to make three or four cauteries, by tracing according to the length of the vein, and according to the shape of the cautery which we have described before; do not press your hand upon the cautery throughout its entire length, but let the patient lie on his back; another method of cautery is to heat the cautery which has two points, as we have demonstrated in the dislocation of the shoulder; lift up the skin where the vein lies, or where the pain comes from towards the left, and raise the skin according to the shape of the body, and let the cautery follow the contours of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	Afterward, insert the two points until they penetrate the skin on the other side; then draw the cautery firmly, and in this way there will be four of them. If you wish, you can cauterize the entire cautery at three points.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the ulcer has healed for a long time, it is worth more than the other ulcers mentioned earlier.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	A cautery is not suitable for an epidenitis, except in the manner that is called "asclytes.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods we have described in sections, and your treatment does not help, then you should give the patient three cauteries around the armpit, one over the stomach, one over the liver, one over the groin, two on the lower back over the spine, and one on the buttock; the cautery should be close to the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After that, let the cautery remain open to ooze pus for a long time, and do not stop the treatment after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the two intentions will come together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly should be the key that we have shown you before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is shown there before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of foot swelling
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in a person with dropsy, and they are filled with yellow water, you should cauterize between the little toe and the ring finger on the top of the foot; lift your hand with the cautery without turning.Ande li sames piez que tu cauterizes entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, querre li sang qu’il vienne sus le piet, et adonques li piez sera desaloiez de la moistor qu’il contenoit; et si tu vois que li sang ne vienne mie sus le piet, adonques covient il que tu le cauterizes entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire en la plante dou piez.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not go too deep, thus one will avoid the yellow awl, and let the cautery follow this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After do on the .ij. legs .ij. cauteries in each leg at the tip of the cuticle; and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other above, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries uncovered for a long time without curing, until the water comes out; then cure the others that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When there is an issue of the belly due to coldness and moisture, as the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are affected, and it cannot be cured by any means of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly with a strong constitution, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before regarding the cautery of the stomach, using a circulating cautery; and four small cauteries around the belly, one subtle cautery on each hip, and two cauteries on the buttocks.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the shoulder, and one cautery on each elbow, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good support.
de la cure des emorroydes	on the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are in the rectum, one or more, and are old and consist of large cold moist corruption, and are treated as described in the section on division, but are not helped by cautery: place III cauteries on the spine of the back, that which is entirely beneath the armpit, poking gently in a triangular shape, and II cauteries below the armpit; and if you think the stomach is chilled, and the meat does not digest, and one sees swelling in the face, then cauterize the face with a large cautery as described earlier, and another on the liver, and another on the kidney using all the cautery needle; and leave the cautery in place for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cleaning the wound until it heals.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the carnosity which is named "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you scrape the thelul, heat the cautery which looks like  .i. razor, and then put it all ablaze on the scraped thelul; and keep your hand so that the cauteries come to the source of the vein, from which the blood flows; do this once or .ij., and if there is a lot of thelul, cauterize each one as we have said. After curing with profiting ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the alchatim, it will have more help.
de plaie mal curee	of a badly cured wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will discuss in its place, such a disease comes that it cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is a fistula, and it becomes suppurating and oozing corrupted moisture, then you must probe it with a thin rod, and be careful that you know how deep the rod goes into the tent.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	Then heat the cautery iron like a razor, and insert it into the fistula according to the amount that the rod entered the tent, and repeat the cautery until the pus and corruption are burned up, once or twice or thrice, according to the amount of its need; and be careful not to burn the nerves that are nearby, and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes into the bladder and the intestines, then be careful of those places, and do not make fire in fleshy places, and think that it is not dead tissue; afterwards clean the wound until it heals, and if the place is inflamed and the matter has been discharged for a long time, then know that the place is completely healed; and if the matter has not been discharged, know that the place is injured and the bone at the bottom is rotten; and thus as one of those whom we will speak of in their places.
de la maladie des reins	of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When cold pain comes to the kidneys, and there are strong winds, and it does not go away, then you should cauterize the kidneys with a hot iron on both sides, as we have said before. If we cauterize in the middle, it will require three cauteries in a line, and they will be more effective.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the part above the bladder where the hairs of the pubic region begin, one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery should be as long as the tip of a thumb; and he makes another cautery over the back, or two if you need it; and the cauteries should be curved as described before.
de la marris	of the mare
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the mare is cold and moist, and does not conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms are delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: therefore one should make three cauteries around the womb, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries over the back; and the cauteries should be curved, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moistors descend to the socket of the hip joint, and due to this it moves out of its place, and the sign is that one leg is longer than the other when measured together; and if the places of dislocation are discovered as hollow, then you must cauterize the patient on the hip socket with a .i. cautery resembling a circle, and mark around the socket as it turns, so that the socket is within the circle; and the cautery should be like those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not available to you, make .iij cauteries of the olive-sized great, and let the cautery be as deep as all the wounds; and heal it until it is better.
de la dolor de la hainche	of hip pain
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is due to cold and moisture, and the disease is cured with what we have said in the section on cures, but the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the disease of the gross humors with stinking pills, or other good-smelling pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After this he is cauterized; and there are two ways of cauterizing: namely, together with burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is done in many ways, one of which is as follows: you cauterize the hip bone with three triangular cauteries according to this shape, and make them deep and large, with an interval between each cautery the thickness of a thumb; the cauteries should be olive-shaped. Sometimes a cautery is made in the middle of the hip, from which there are four according to this shape:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you want, cauterize with the circular cautery that we mentioned earlier in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circles contain the entire hip, and all the thickness of the skin is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And that is the way they do it in sciatica when the pain is in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it extends to the thigh and leg, they cauterize where the patient feels pain, and above the ankle joint four times on the left side a little; the cauteries should be curved, and burn through the thickness of the skin; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to one or two toes, they cauterize there where they feel pain in three or four places with what is called the "toes" cautery.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if necessary, do it more; and if he feels the pain below the knee towards the thigh, do cauterization with a knife or circular cautery, and be careful with all your cauterizations that you don't leave the cautery so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient greater harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who had cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it until the leg was completely swollen, and the foot as well, and it became pierced and all the feet were corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a stomach ache which caused his death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two places together, do cautery in one and then the other, according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise men said about the cautery of the hip, whose method is as follows: make an iron that is as big at its tip as a finger nail, or a little less, and that it is wide between the teeth by the thickness of a thumb nail; and let the teeth be opposite each other in two parts, and also shaped like nuts, and let there be a handle of well-made iron; and this is the shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is all red and dripping, and then put it on the box of the hip joint, and let it be turned to the healthy side; and cauterize once with one cautery and leave it for 3 days; and then make a plaster of butter, and let the wound remain open for a long time; after the cure of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use this cautery sparingly because of its regard, and see little of those who employ it; and yet it is one of the good cauteries which can endure it, and where it occurs.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cautery of medicine burns if you make the instrument to interlace in such a way that the edge of the door descends, and it is made of bronze or iron with one long side, and at the top it has two notches, and between each one there is the thickness of a fingernail; and they are open on the bottom and on top, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After that, place the box of the hip on the sick person lying on his sound side, and press your hand firmly on the box of the hip; then pour between the two circles of hot wax which has been heated in the fire for a moment, and let the sick person endure the heat and burning for an hour.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because there is biting as well as burning; and when the biting has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip with gentle wax, and leave it thus for three days, and apply butter until what is blackened by the scald is healed; and let it be for three days until suppuration stops; and that would be the last aid after the treatment of ointments until he is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, then make the instrument that colors it according to what you did in the hip joint; and that is the way of the hot brand, and I wrote it in the treatise on the rectification of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, as much of each, and grind them together, and put them in a nine-pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Let there be a small hole in it so that the tip of a needle can enter; and put on top of this pot another well-plumbed pot, and put over the alkali and chalk a soft brand, as much as you have moistened your hand with; and let it stand thus until it descends to the bottom of the powdered pots, then take all that brand, and pour it over the chalk and over the alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then there will be much agony and it is relieved through various medical procedures and cauterizations of other limbs; for it does great harm like fire, and also by other medicines with which one cauterizes the hip joint, such as thistle and honey and soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells of a remedy by which a man was cured of sciatic pain and a vein in his hip, and he praises it highly, saying that nothing else was done to him, and that he was healed in one go after this treatment, and that he then bathed as instructed below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he describes how one should take green and dry litharge and grind it with a little fat, and apply it to the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is located, and leave it for three hours; by then the patient should no longer feel any burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then he enters the bath until his body is somewhat warmed, and he enters the bed, and the pain will go away completely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such medicine with cautery unless after the evacuation of the body's fluids.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And دياسكوريدس says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's dung, it helps a lot; and the cautery must be done in such a way:
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take lamb's wool and grease it with old oil, and place it in the hollow between the big toe of the foot and the one next to it, which is called the 'foscile'.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After that, take dried goat's dung and place it in the fire until it becomes charcoal, then place it on the wool and leave it there until it burns out; do this again and keep doing it until you feel that it has reached the hip and the pain has stopped; this type of cautery is called 'goat cautery'.
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes in the back, whether from falling or impact or from excessive evacuation, or from similar appearances of cold matter, none of these appearances are worth cauterizing for, except for that which comes from the diffusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary, after the patient has voided foul pills or other similar remedies, to make three lines marked with ink on the back, where the pain persists; and in each line, make 5 cauteries, or more according to the strength and amount that the patient can endure. The cauteries should be performed using the cautery instrument called "poins". If you see fit, make 3 or 4 cauteries with the medium-sized cautery instrument according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a stiff neck when they wake up, and fear; and you will find in the lower spine in the back and in us the appearance that comes over the other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you cure it, then cauterize it with a silver cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the purple cautery evenly affects each part of the spine.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery 2 or 3 lines apart, and have the points close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	Afterwards, heal the site until it is healthy according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply cautery to any area that is swollen with pus and is affecting a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain is caused by moistors that spread throughout the body's members, and when pain comes in the feet, which they properly call 'podagra', and when it is caused by a cold condition and cannot be cured by medicines, then it is cured by cautery in the following way: make the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive oil according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is a need to prick on the sole of the foot, do so with the entire cautery that one calls «point».
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this often happens, do cauterization on each knee with 3 or 4 cauteries of each part, using the entire olive-colored cautery; and if you need more, then do more, but do not hold your hand firmly for longer than the thickness of the heart is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and back, administer the cautery we have described in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make punctures around the wrist two lines; and if there is no pain left in the fingers, make punctures on each joint and on the palm of the hand; and if the pains come to the armpits or shoulders, cauterize each part, and use good treatment for the ailment and take medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give him good treatment and purge the phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	from the root of the eye socket
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When a hernia occurs in the groin, and the testicles descend into the scrotum, this is new, so when you see it being cured, he must not eat that day. He should use things that loosen the belly so that the feces can exit his belly; after that, make him sit on his back between your hands, and order him to hold his breath until the testicles are healed, and bring them up to your fingers, and sign underneath the hernia on the bone of the groin, and all around a sign that looks like half a circle above the body; then heat up the cautery so it has this shape:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it is white and dripping blood.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bones to their place; and have him hold his hand so that it does not return; and work the thighs well for the patient, and put a pillow under his thighs, and the sergeant on top of the thighs, and the other on the foot which presses the hands; then put the cautery on the vein all over the palm of the hand, and hold it straight and do this until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, do it again until you reach the bone; and be careful that the vein does not pop out when you are doing the cautery so that you do not burn him, and so that the patient does not die, or suffer some other ill.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And the cautery for children should be subtle according to the size of ears, and for large people also large according to their size; after three days dress the site of the cautery with butter until the scald is healed; then dress it with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days so that the wound is well closed; and one should wait a long time before he starts to walk around so that the stitches do not come undone when he gets up to move about.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after 40 days when he wants to get up, have a well-made bandage ready for him, and wear it for another 40 days; and keep him in good rest, doing little work, and guard against too much eating and drinking, and shouting too loudly; and if he follows this instruction he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say hereafter about the treatment of cutting in his shoulder.
de la routure dou ventre	of stomach ulcers
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ulcers come in other stomachs and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, he should be cauterized with the fire cautery according to its quantity, and it should burn the third of the skin; after the treatment as we have said; and some of the ancients say that one should cauterize with a three-pointed cautery according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first sign the site of entry and make a line along its width above the ulcer, and another across, and hold your hand still all over during the cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and milder.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in a limb, either from falling or from injury, and that pain lasts a long time, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called 'sharp', and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb, its smallness and weakness, and its torture and pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; if not, perform another cautery on it, for such is the custom that it should move in the member nearest to it, therefore you must apply cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	of mixing
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	Some diseases are aided by cautery with great benefit, especially those that arise from putrefied humours and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Now you have seen how to cauterize it, take care that the disease is in its early stages, and if it is cured according to what we have said above, and does not disappear or remain, but you doubt that corruption may spread throughout the body, then make five cauteries on the head: one in the middle of the forehead, and two at the temples, one behind the ear, and one at the hairline; and hold your hand so that the cautery reaches to the bone, and so that the vapours of the gross humours may issue out, and cauterize the mouth according to what is described above.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	If the disease is scattered throughout the body, and it is clearly evident, then you must cauterize it with these cauteries that we have mentioned: one cautery on the head, two cauteries on the spine of the neck, six cauteries on the spine of the back, one large cautery on the groin, and one additional cautery on each hip; two cauteries on the elbows, two cauteries on the knees, one cautery on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; be careful not to burn the nerves that are on the back of the heel. Sometimes a cautery is applied to the bone of the wrist, and one to the bone of the stomach, and one to the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more you do of cautery, the more it helps, and moves the profit; and know that the patient does not feel pain from cautery as the healthy person feels it, because the body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cautery be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of the irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	Afterwards, treat the site with a poultice of wheat flour with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes in any member and is cured by medicines and oils and poultices, and it is not healed, then make cauteries on the member according to the size of the member; and let the cautery be somewhat penetrating into the depth of the joint; then cure it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes cautery is done on the hand and foot and back, at the outlet of the nerve that paralyzes the limb, and thus if the swelling is removed; and yet no one should meddle with it unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the outlets of the nerves moving through the body.
de albaras	of albaras
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is awakened, and medicine does not help, then cauterize it with a moderately deep cautery according to the thickness of the vein, so that the whiteness is removed and its color changed; then treat it with a poultice of equal parts linseed and lentil flour, rose oil, and plantain leaves, as well as blood from the colon and almond blood. Mix everything together and apply it, binding it with a cloth and keeping it in place until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of sores by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a chancre appears at its beginning, and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with a cautery that looks like a circle, all around the perimeter of the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And yet the wise say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the chancre; and yet I do not think this is good, for I have seen it happen many times that it is ulcerated and rotted, and a more certain thing is to cauterize around it, with a cautery called 'circle', as we have said about many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot subside
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it is slow to heal because of the excess fluid it produces, or because of the age of the disease when it becomes decrepit (that is, very old), and there is little blood, or because of time; and you see it getting worse: then cauterize it all over with many small cauteries, pricking as you go; afterwards leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	Because it will hasten its death.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing all around with the cautery, then heat the cautery from which the form comes:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of the disease called  "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the skin, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels them throughout his body in such a way that the flow of the pus is relieved.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Afterwards, heal it perfectly.Si li saingne ne vult point curer ou si il demoure longuement en la meureir: adonques tu le remets a leu et covient que li fies 10 cauteres entor de l’esgoutte, et estraigne li keur par les eculz qui sont sus le piez, ou s’il ne veult point aler par les piés, adonques tu le traites a la maniere qu’adibele.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cautery by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of disease is called "corroding", and it is nothing other than a melting of the member, for it melts the members as fire melts dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a place that can withstand fire cautery, then heat the cautery tools both small and large, according to what is appropriate for the location of the disease; after cauterizing it all over until you reach the healthy tissue underneath, so that nothing of the corruption remains, only that all that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for 3 days, and apply soft poultices with oil upon the cauterized places until the burns from the fire are healed, and all the corruption is removed.Et si li cauteres feuz ne puissent osteit toute la corruption, adonques covient qu’il soit remede par eschaudures de leus.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of inflammations caused by humidity.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after 3 days that a healthy hair does not grow, it is good; and if not, then restart the cautery on what is left of the corrupted hairs.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this hair loss is sometimes cured by medicine instead of fire cautery; but nonetheless, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already described the cure for medicine ague in the division: take the amount you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of warts that come on the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that on different feet a disease called "clos" according to our understanding occurs, and is a large, hard lump that affects the foot.Et si li pies sont trots, et ne peut aller en son office, que il soit eslongeant de la foyt que il doit; et si li pies de la main sunt trots, qu’il ne peut faire aucun ofis de main: et est li pies de la main et le pied trots, selonc la nassance.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauteries for this disease are according to two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is, fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is where you heat the cautery iron as hot as a wax candle, and it is made of good iron to the size that it can cover the nail all around, and it has thin edges; after which you place it all around the nail, and turn your hand around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail; then leave it thus for three days until pus begins to form; then make a poultice of crushed wild mallows with salt, and leave the poultice on overnight; then the nail will fall off and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the wound with an ointment until it is cured.Cautere d’aigue chaude si est que tu prends de l’aigue boullante et la mets sus li clou tant qu’il fieent giter, et le remuers tot entor, et le remuers tot entor; puis li fai un emplaustre come celuy del cautere de feu.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted away from the body, and often occur in hands and feet, then you must administer hot water cautery; and it is in this way: take a bronze or iron cane, or a pen of wattle, and place it on the nail and the wound, that is to say, warts; and place the cane so that it covers all around, then put a little hot water on it, and hold your hand steady, and press your hand as you turn so that the edge of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water deep into the root; and let the patient endure the burning of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will be uprooted at all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another, until you have pulled out all those in the body, then heal them with ointments that generate flesh.
li cure dou trembler	the shaking treatment
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone trembles from coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever or other [ailments], you should make four or five cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spinous process; and one cautery on the penis, and one on the stomach with an olive-oil cautery; this will stop the trembling and hasten the recovery from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of stinking pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	There appear sometimes through the body sores or stinking pustules, which come from corrupt humours.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If necessary, when they first appear, one should make a cautery on the top of each pustule: with a thin stick of myrrh-wood, the end being taken in the fire, or a long root of aristoalogue, or with the lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning as they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow any further but the excess from which they come is destroyed and they are healed; but this must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	There are often great flowings of blood from the artery which is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cautery on the limb, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to stanch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet when this happens to someone, you must quickly put your index finger over the wound of the vein, and hold it very firmly until the blood is quiet under your finger and no drops issue forth; then take a number of olive-oil cauteries, both large and small according to the wound and the location where the artery runs, and apply the cautery to that vein where you are holding your finger, and keep the cautery there until the bleeding is staunched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if the bleeding starts again when you lift your finger from the wound and the cautery goes out, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease doing this one after the other until the bleeding is staunched; and be careful that you do not harm the nerve nearby, and that no other ill comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be well staunched by itself if the artery is large, unless by one of four methods we have described: by cautery, or by extraction if it is untreated, or by a strong ligature, or by medicines applied which have the power to staunch bleeding; and it should be bound and compressed skillfully.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	He who administers a tight bandage or places hot objects on top, or similar things, will not benefit much if at all.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to someone and there is no medicine or healing available, then one should put their index finger on the wound as we have said, and press firmly on the wound and the vein; and they should not move it but moisten it with cold water often so that it becomes very cold until the blood congeals and swells and becomes firm; and they should make a splint in front of what is needed for cauterizations and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of wound treatments
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about all the diseases that require cauterization with fire or burning medicines, and their causes, instruments, forms of cauteries; and I have placed that chapter from the head to the foot, and I will continue in this chapter by the same way for what one can more easily find.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so that I may begin this, it is necessary, dear son, for you to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and because of that greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I admonish you that you do not attempt foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For in many ways people come to cures.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from such who are so accustomed to their disease that they change easily because of the foolishness they find in their disease, and because of the greatness of its wickedness; and one must fear these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And from these there are those who give you their sense, and say: "Wait, I am healed"; and the disease is outrageous.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	You should not consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put more confidence in your honor than in your desire, and do not open foolishly but wisely what you are certain of, and from which you can obtain profit and gain; and use prognostication and indication in the cure of your illnesses where salvation is turned to; and that will help you to this good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have assigned this chapter to you in discussing the topic of cautery, according to what has been presented before in the chapter on cautery from head to foot, so that you can find more easily whatever you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	You should know that this disease often comes to children during childbirth, and when the baby's head is squeezed too hard; and sometimes it comes from a relaxed cause that one does not know about.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	I have never seen this disease in adults; and of all those I have seen, death has always resulted; and for that reason, it seems best to me not to continue the treatment beyond a certain point.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and his head swelled every day until he could no longer bear it; and the moisture accumulated under the bone above the brain, between the heart and the bone. And if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, then you should make a large slit in the head, as long as two fingers, so that the moisture may flow out; and see the shape of the spatomile:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the hollow is deeper, and the abscess is larger, then make two slits in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the openings of the head wider on each side, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand from within, and it does not close up again: then you must make three slits in the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, draw out all moisture forcefully.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Afterwards, tighten the slits with bandages and powders, and put in wine and oil, and leave it thus for five days; then loosen it, and cure the wound by tenting and anointing, and let the head be extracted evenly, and give the patient dry food of meat from the pouch of moisture until the limb is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you observe where the aperture of the abscess is, and the gathering of the pus; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut therefore where the abscess opens, and the gathering of the pus, and cut it according to what you can; and be careful not to cut the artery, and let blood flow, so that the patient dies from blood loss and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	from gout
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to someone that they have a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or the feet, and the disease is old, and the medicine does not help, then the last resort is cautery with which one will cut the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is necessary, when you see them bend their heads, that the sick person bends his head backwards; then rub the place with a rough cloth until the arteries are revealed, then press the neck of the sick person on the cloth; then look where the vein goes, and its path behind the ears, and it is very close to being repressed; then sign the paths inwards, then bandage both sides with an acute spatula, two parts at a time, so that the vein comes to the bone, and this should be done from the side of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, insert the spatulum under the artery and cut it from above, cutting also .ij. fingers across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, the blood will flow out continuously upward.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to the touch, then you must measure the amount of space of three fingers, then sign inwards and cut to the bone; and that which is necessary of blood put out is six parts, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone without any of the phlegm, then bandage so that no abscess comes, then press the wound and ligate it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	from the emetic
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old-age anemia comes, and catarrh is acute, due to moistors of the eyes and heat in the temples and ancient soddeness and similar things, and he has been treated by various methods of medicine and all of it does not help him, then we should open the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extracting them is that the patient should let the hair of his temples grow, and feel for the artery in his temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is not very swollen in some people who are too cold; and if it is swollen, then the patient should press on his neck with some folded cloth, then rub the area with some rough cloth, and anoint the area with warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatulum made of this material:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	then lightly scorch the skin until you reach the artery, then pull it upward with tweezers, and carefully separate it from the tissues beneath in each part; and if the artery is thin, return it to the tip of the nail, then cup that part according to the quantity of the two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cupped, the blood will not flow everywhere throughout the body.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out the blood from 1/4 to 1/2 ounce, and if the artery is large, you should tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread so that pus will not come before the wound heals, and the blood will flow smoothly; then cut off the excess between the two ties in that same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a hot-iron knife up to the bone until the joints are cut; and this is the best way, if the patient does not have a fever and is of a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cautery helps to end moisture; for this reason it is of greater help with moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the hole with old cotton and puts it on top of well-made tenting; and when they are removed, they are cured with dry medicines that cause scabs to form, and with tenting, until it is healed; and if without cutting into the artery as much as you work at it, you hurry to cover it with cautery, or you use vitriol and press it in your hand so that the blood is stopped; and if you don't have this present, put a finger on the spot so that the blood is frozen, and moisten the spot with cold water so that the blood stops, and press it as it should be; and what is best and easier in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery of 2 parts, but the cutter must be very thick to retain its heat for longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	Because when the instrument is too thin, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And between the two knives there should be a distance of one finger's width, and then when you have made an incision in both places, put the hot iron on it until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and keep the two heads apart because they are not welded together by this cautery; and this is how the cautery should be formed:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When tears are falling from the eyes that are above the testicle of the head, and medicine does not help the healing, and you see the face of the sick person turning red, and there is movement in the front as if it were trembling; and when the oil is thin and moist so that the hair of the eyelids has fallen out, and the eyelids are scorched by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And the ancient called it "cure contused", and it is that you do to the patient who has this disease, let him have hairs on his forehead, then make three slits in the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and one of the slits should be as long as two fingers all across the forehead going downward, and the other two at the two temples above the eyebrows, and beware of cutting the arteries that are at the two sides above the eyebrows; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two mandibles, and each wound should be the quantity of three fingers across joined; and have ready a piece of sponge and cloth to wipe up the blood, then fill the spatulum with oil on both sides where there is the shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision that is to be made on the temple up to the second incision; and scorch all the skin between the .ij cuts as far down as the cheek bone, then make another cut from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then take out this spathanium.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you put into the first cut the instrument that is called "culter", and is very sharp on one side and not sharp on the other, and this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the knife cutting towards the chest bone in the heart, and the other knife towards the bone, and cut it so that it comes to the middle split.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous to what opens in the heart, and then make another incision in the middle split up to the other defiant; and then draw out blood evenly, and express the place for the taken blood; then put a tent of old cotton into each split, and put wet garments in wine and oil and garlic on top, and guard against hot abscesses coming; and at the third day loosen the ligature, and administer plenty of cold water, then cure it with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other cures for wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	from the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When someone has a sudden catarrh and you see the eyes are sunken and small, and the vision weakened, and the eyelids burnt, and the hair falling out, and pain in the head, and the patient sneezing; then know from these symptoms that this matter and these catarrhs come from many veins, and the cure for it is to let blood.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you should command the patient to raise his forehead, then make a large cut in the middle of the forehead, and another wide one nearby.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And you should start the incision from the left temple to the right, reaching the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves in the temples that control movement, and when the bone is exposed, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, and then insert old cotton between the two lips of the cut, and apply tenting with linen; then bind dampened cloth in wine and oil over it, and beware of hot abscesses; when it has healed, you should rub the bone until new tissue starts to grow, then treat it with astringent remedies that promote healing.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this way: take two parts of wheat-flower and four parts of colophony, and make an ointment; then administer it in these wounds to promote healing throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the cleaning of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls from the ears is one of four things: grains, animals, minerals or similar objects like iron; seeds, such as peas, beans and lentils; or flowing substances like water, garlic and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it shrinks in the ear, or something else that doesn't adhere to or grow in the ear, put the ear towards the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see a stone, distil a little violet oil or oil of assafety, then bring about extraction; and let him sneeze from scent, and stuff the nostrils when sneezing comes, and place pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and have the ear uppermost.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Frequently it comes out through this treatment; and if it does not come out, then bring about extraction with very thin pincers, of which this is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out with the forceps, that is good; if not, use a thin, small pair of tweezers made of soft iron and insert their tips into the ear canal firmly; then stop the area around the tips with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the forceps; then pull it out firmly. Often it will come out in this way, as we have said. If not, take a glottis (a pair of forceps) similar to those used for birds and insert an instrument designed for this purpose, then put some cotton around it; press the glottis against the object, whether it is a stone or something else, and pull out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it does not come out with these methods, you should split the ear so that pus and blood come out, causing a chalazion  and spasm; the splitting method is as follows: first, bleed the patient's head, then make him sit between your hands and turn his ear upward, then make a small incision at the root of the ear where the fat depends, and make the incision in the shape of a moon so that you can reach the stone; then extract it according to your ability, and suck it firmly with your mouth until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain that is inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer .i. spatumile tenve subtle according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and bring about incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think that the grains are moist due to moisture in the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract it with thin pincers and a suckling-cup, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	Therefore in the water that runs into the ear, the patient should use scent to cause sneezing first, and fill the ear with soft cotton.Quant il distend l’oreille si que li muque se distende, met a l’entree de l’oreille, es deux costez del garnement, quelque oile violete et suc, si com nos avons dit; et s’il ne peut venir fuer par ceste manier, si covient le faire estracter as pinceures subtilz.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let him lie on the affected ear itself.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps out by itself, that is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If it does not jump out by itself, take many small stones according to the length of your middle finger and finger tips, and heat them in fire; then put one into the ear of the patient, and push on the other end from another part with a sharp stone upon the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop doing this from stone to stone until all the fluid has come out, and so it will entirely jump out; and if you see that, take a straw and put one end into the ear, and heat the other end in fire until the finer straw is burnt; then do the same with other straws until all the fluid has come out, as we have said about the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the insect, if it is of a small body, such as a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is of a large body that can be felt, administer extraction with pincers; and this is the easiest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section on distillations, and if the treatment is not effective, then you should examine the ear in the sun; if any worms appear, pull them out with fine tweezers, and if none appear, take a sample of the fluid where the pain is located.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it is tight below and loose above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Then insert the smallest end of the tube into the ear according to the amount of pain from the malady, then suck strongly on the tube; do this repeatedly until all the pus comes out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not come out, then plug the tube with cotton as I have said for a stone; and if they do not come out as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven for worm-cutting, and you will find them in the section on distillations; and so distil your oils and medicines into the ear through this instrument, whose form is as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it can be made of silver or brass with small holes below and a wider opening above for distillation; and to press the distillation into the instrument use a well-made brass rod, and if you see fit, wrap cotton around the tip; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicines you use, into the rod, and let the rod be in the ear; then put the rasor, filled with cotton, into the ear, and press your hand gently so that the oil is distilled into the ear canal; and he feels the medicine inside, and let the distillation be a little warm, as one would heat it over fire to distil it into the ear; and be careful that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the cleaning of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without an earhole; and the same thing happens to adults due to the cleaning of a wound or a cyst inside the ear. This cleaning sometimes opens a perforation in the eardrum, which cannot be seen; and sometimes there is only a small defect, which can be seen clearly.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, when there is an opening that cannot be seen, it is a sign of a poor prognosis in many cases. In such cases, one should hold the affected ear towards the sun and examine it. If you can see the perforation clearly, then its appearance indicates the nature of the disease:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And it should be narrow and sharp in front and behind, so that it does not pierce the ear. If the perforation is due to a cyst or body part in the ear, then one should hold it with fine tweezers and gently scrape away at it until all the foreign matter is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the growths are deep in the ear, take a thin, small razor and heat it slightly in the fire, then place it on the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you sense the patient hears poorly, pierce gently and be careful not to damage the ear nerves; then insert a tent into the ear according to the size of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this every day until the wound is healed, then take a tent and moisten it in rosewater, and powder over vitrialed vitriol; and if you see swelling in the ear, it is appropriate to draw out the tent and move another tent moistened with cerotum made of rosin oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then clean it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if there is bleeding, take a sponge and dip it in cold water, and apply it to the ear, and use other remedies which stop the bleeding that come from distilling treatments.
de la char des papieres	from the ash of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This treatment involves papers on the eyes when they are moist and dry; you should then extend them with tweezers and pincers, and the head of a spatula from its roots; then place powdered vitriol over the area.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if it is without skin, one should cauterize it with a thin lens, and the cautery after the incision will help; and many times they return, as long as something remains in their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of hail
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times there come on the ears things that look like gravel in shape and hardness, and because of this the disease is called "gout"; it is an assembly of thick moisture on top and bottom of the paper; the treatment is such: examine whether the gout is silent on one side and the other, and this is a simple thing to know; then they cut it open from the large part, then peel each part gently, then grab it with tweezers and crush it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot crush it without piercing the paper, then pierce it slightly, as long as it does not hurt the patient; and if the split is large, then stitch it up, and treat it until it is healed; and if it is small, do not make any effort, for ointments will quickly restore and heal it.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hailstone is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, then reverse the paper, and hold the hailstone with pincers, and press from both sides; and if the paper is removed by incision, it does not matter; and when the hailstone is crushed, wash the eye with salted water, and clean the place of that which causes pain until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that is woven into the papers above it, and this happens more to children than to adults, and severely to themselves; and they get the catharsis in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears hasten to their eyes; and because of this they lie down on their faces, and sleep on them, and their papers are underneath their eyelids moistened by which the swelling and appearance have covered with exinach that appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the place between your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of treatment is that the patient puts his head on yours; and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains the exinah from each part, and then place it over him; and press with your fingers from both sides, so that the exinah is gathered within the circle. Then cut through the moisture with the spatulum, making a slit no larger than the wound made in the vein when opening it; and in some cases, the exinah comes out of the slit according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	So take a piece of cloth and hold it between your fingers and thumb, and turn your hand to the left and right until it is stretched; and be careful not to push into the fissure so that you do not go all the way to the sphenoid bone up to the eye, lest you damage it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the exit does not open at the beginning of the fissure, then widen the fissure slightly so that it opens; then withdraw as we have said, then moisten a piece of cloth in vinegar and water, and apply it to the spot, and draw out with a bandage.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are men who grind salt and place it on to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal it until it is cured.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a hot abscess comes to the place, then treat it with cooling poultices until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	of hair from papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow from papers and are not of their nature, and they harm the eyes, causing various diseases such as tears, softness of the papers, and albuginea, leading to destruction of the eyes; the cure is according to four methods: through cauterization with fire, or with medicine water according to what comes before the chapter on cauterization, and it is done either by incision and stitching or with splints, according to what I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You should place the patient's head in your lap, then hold the paper of the eye in your left hand; if it turns easily, that is good; if not, insert a needle with thread through the paper, either at the edge or where the hair is growing, and pass the thread over the entire paper, then hold it against the razor; next, cut into the skin under the paper, under the aberrant hairs, up to the great tear duct and down to the small one; then remove the thread and place a small tent of cotton and linen under the paper; mark a figure on the paper, like a holly leaf, but adjust the shape according to the amount you see the divided paper rising.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if to the one who needs it, one applies a large quantity of paper according to how the paper is moistened; then they make an incision along the two lines that you have marked, and they start from the larger nostril up to the smaller; and let one of the slits be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a hair root, then insert the needle into one of the two corners of the heart, then peel it all; then bring the two lips together with a single thread of fine woolen yarn through an eye needle, and draw out the blood, and allow the excess of the threads to dry over the two eyebrows if you see fit to do so; and if not, then don't worry about it, leave the stitches in for three or four days; then treat the wound without stitches using dry and constricting substances, because the paper sticks to the wound as it heals, but the stitches become loose (as the ancients say), and this is a job without fear; and there is another way: you mark the paper with a shape that is like the leaf of a myrtle, as we have described, with three pointed lobes according to the form that is here.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut what is on top into small pieces evenly according to the shape that is there:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the forceps, and the wound is not equal, take a needle and thread, and sew it up in the middle; and sew another thread from the large earlobe, and the second thread from the small one, and bring the threads together between your fingers evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin on which you have sewn, as we have described, then bring together the two lips of the wound by sewing, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar soothing ointments; and sometimes the hair of the paper turns: so you must use what we said about the incision; but the sewing in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of bones is as follows: turn the paper and cut it inside according to what I have said, then make two bones by art, and two thin threads as long as the paper and the width of the spatulum; then tie two knots at each end where you hold the threads; then assemble them skillfully above what is on top of the paper of the eye, and pull out the two bones from their formed parts; and leave it for a few days, and the skin that was pulled will die, become numb, and fall off, as it heals.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it persists, and the wound has a large force, then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is sewn, and the paper is raised, and the hair no longer hurts; and this is the shape of the two canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	the procedures are such that you pierce a thin needle and thread in it with a fine silk thread; then assemble the eyes and tie them skillfully, and let the length of the threads be about a palm long; then arrange another fine silk thread in the case and tie it at its end; then put the patient's head on your hand; and have it exposed to the sun so that the procedures are revealed, for this is a subtle and delicate procedure, then pierce the needle all the way through the paper until you draw it over the natural hair; then pull out the hair up to the case, and thread that hair into the case, whether there is one or two or three or more; then pull your hand back so that the hairs are drawn outward through the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	If the pustule is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then you shall treat the pustule from underneath to the very end that you have directed, until the pustule comes out from above the opening, and you see it with your eye; then you shall draw out the pustule and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for 2 or 3 days, until the hair grows back in its place, and new skin forms over it; and if the hair is short, accompany one long hair from the eyebrows, and let them grow together until they are stretched out, and then cut them.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the eye pustule
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease called "alacriaty" or warts comes in the eye, there are two ways it can happen: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or cutting, or cauterization, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way to treat it is to split the growth, separate its lips, and place within it tents of flax, and let it heal; and you must not use in its treatment anything that would dry it out and constrict it.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do that, the disease will return worse than before; but use moistening things, such as fenugreek; and rosewater or altis and flax seed are cooked, and diaquilon ointment melted in any of the oils, and wrap a tent around it, and treat it thus.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your cure is that you must be careful that it does not heal according to its former shape; and these works which we have said are not remedies for this disease, but only to prevent it from returning to its former shape.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	from the pus that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is below and which is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Accidents come from wounds and incisions and cauterization and similar things; the way to treat them is that you take a needle with a double thread and pierce the flesh, and have it emerge at the left eyebrow so that the thread extends to both sides of the face; then the flesh above the needle is cut all the way to the broad spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper returns as it should be, that is good; if not, then take a razor and place it in the incision, and turn the paper over, and make two incisions along the side within the paper; and let the two corners of the incisions be at the two angles of the cut you have made, and form angles so that when they are joined together, the shape is like that of the letter "I" in Greek; then remove the flesh according to the amount that its sides are cut under the paper, then close up the two separated parts and sew them with a thread of wool; then treat it as we have said with softening medicines and poultices until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a crack or a wound or cautery, then one should make a plain slit under the hair of the skin, and according to what is above; then draw between the two lips of a tent, as I have said; and one should perform the operation according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise master prepares machines with all his power how he makes the figure return to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what he needs of operations and instruments in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	Sudden movement of the skin
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suddenness happens to the skin in such a way that the paper above is separated from the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then one should push the tip of a razor under the paper and lift it upwards; and they are held by tweezers, so that you grab what is open on the surface of the staphitis, which is neither too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient cannot bear for the staphitis to be too sharp or to cut into the eye; and your incision, by which you scrape this union, should be light, so that the paper returns to its natural shape; and all of this union is healed, and sometimes in the eye there is a salty water, and it is lifted with sweet water, and a collarette; then put between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and put over the eye soft lamb's wool soaked in egg white; and after the third day use the collar and soothing things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the nail has two forms: it is nervous and resembles a hard cyst; the other is not nervous but resembles white congealed moisture which, when touched with iron and crushed between pincers, cannot be crushed by anyone; and both types originate from the lower eyelid, growing little by little until they cover the entire eye, its light, and its movement.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of the incision is that the patient places his head on your lap, then opens his eyes; and hold the paper in your hand, then grab the nail with pincers made of thin metal, and pierce it at the top; then take a needle, thread a horsehair, or cow's hair, or ox's hair, through it, and double its point over and insert it into the nail, and tie the nail to the thread, and extend it upwards, then scrape away all around the nail where the eyelid continues towards the tear duct until you reach the soft tissue; then cut off the remaining part at the root of the tear duct with gentle motions, using a delicate instrument, and leave the natural skin of the eyelid, so that no incision comes into contact with the tear duct, as we have said; then extend the nail to the little finger only, and tie it to the thread, as we have described.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful that the instrument does not touch and break the carnous membrane, and that the tear duct is not pierced; and after the incision, apply a little ground chalk to the eye, and a collar made of linen soaked in it, and leave it until the next day; then treat it as needed until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	If the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push in the needle, nor can the hooks enter, many times this kind of nail is cured by medicine; and it grows as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, then work on the eye of the disease, and take the spatulum slightly pointed according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And gently lift up the nail and if you see that it does not diminish and the inflammation draws near, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litharge and red copper ore and powdered, and stop up the eye until the next day; then begin again the other work according to this same method, until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then begin again the work as before, until it is healed.Et se il y aveit aposteme froid, adonques cure l’aposteme par le chaus; et si tu vois qu’elle ne voulent point arder, si distille en l’oil du vin de groseille, et du coliere dou ver, et du litargire, et du sal amoniac; et si la chose n’est pas trop chaude, si peit de ta bouche.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh around the eyelid hurts in the eye with great harm, then suspend it on the hook and scrape off a part but not all so that no body of tears comes into it; then distill into the eye red copper ore made from litharge.And if the appearance of the flesh around the eyelid hurts in the eye with great harm, then suspend it on the hook and scrape off a part but not all so that no body of tears comes into it; then distill into the eye red copper ore made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows over the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	In some men, a red blister sometimes emerges from the eyelid, covering the eyeball and pressing down on the eyelids, resembling a rose in a vase; the treatment is for the patient to put his head down into your lap, then you work on the eyes, and with all that fire at the edges of the eyelid, hold it firmly in place; next, cut the first blister, and keep cutting all the way to the base of the lash, being careful not to nick the eyeball during the operation; let the incision be as deep as the one described for the nail, and use gentle pressure to remove the blister, as demonstrated in this chapter; once the incision is complete and all the blister has been removed, apply a corrosive medicine like red vitriol to the eye, and then cover it with cotton soaked in egg white to protect against hot abscesses; if nothing remains, and the white of the eye turns red, indicating a hot abscess, leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with cooling remedies; then return to your task once the eye has healed, and do the same for any other blisters that appear in the eye in this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, it is necessary to adapt the treatment based on whether the condition is natural or accidental, and to use tools made of iron; do not insert your fingers in any of these treatments until you see that the patient can tolerate it.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	So are red veins that are covered over the eye, and tolerate the sight of its work and weaken the eye all day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	So it is necessary for the first that you look at the eye, because the vein is in such a way; command the patient to put his head down, then suspend those veins all at once according to his wisdom, and let the incisions be made twice as fine according to this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And two edges in .I. body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then draw gently on the veins with a subtle force, and let the blood out an hour after another, until you see the veins removed from the eye; and be careful not to wound the eye with the points of the spatulas, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not touch anything beyond the veins; and when you have done this, distill into the eye a green and red collyrium to corrupt what remains of the sebaceous material.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot pull out all of this in that hour, then make a plaster over the eye with soothing things for the pain of them, and let it be for several days until the pain is assuaged and the hot abscess is secured, then begin again according to this method which is before until it is healed; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the eye fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The surgeon should examine the "arissati" fistula: when you cure it by cautery and with burning medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is a hole in it that you must open over the abscess, where it should remain, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed and you will see the corruption and blackness, then return to all of the instrument by which this form is made; and it is called a "sharp point", and it should be made to pierce one tip, and it should be pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put it on the site of the corrupt bone, then turn it between your fingers and press your hand a little until you feel that the corruption has been removed; do this several times, then restore the site with drying medications.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	if the hole is sealed, and flesh grows there, and the body of the wound is sealed, and remains so for 40 days, and it does not reoccur and is not abscessed, know that it is healed; if not, then there is nothing else to do but to reopen the fistula at the opening of the nose according to this form: and you must uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered, take the iron according to this form, and let the head of the iron be three-pronged, and the shaft be tapered to the tip as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then he puts it on the bone next to the eyebrow, and moves his hand away from the eye a little, then returns to the entire area until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through the wind if he holds his hand over his nose; and then he restores the area with dry remedies, as I have taught you, and when the flesh heals and hardens, he examines the matter in the nose; and it is lighter for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the exit of the eye:
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes open fully, and there is no disturbance to the eye or diminution, then you should ligature the patient; then let it heal, then put leeches or suckers without piercing, then apply a poultice of acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla on the eye, then bandage it with bandages and cloths; and the manner of the bandages is that you take soft bandages, doubling each one four times, then place them one upon the other according to the quantity that the eye needs; then tighten it from above with a firm bandage, and repeat the leeches without piercing to suck; then remove the leeches and leave the eye tight day and night, and if the ligature softens, you must tighten it much; then remove the ligature after the day and night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good; if not, then repeat the poultice, bandages, ligature, and leeches until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	from the rupture of a woven cloth
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in a woven cloth, then it opens and comes out like a grain of resin, and is terrible to see; therefore, if you see it covered, the work is such that you insert a needle into the root of the lower part up to the upper part, then insert another needle where there is a double thread of the upper arm; and pierce it, and leave the first needle according to its position; then pull on the place of the double thread and tie one part of the weave tightly, then pull out the needle and put a wet lamb's wool over the eye; and let it be until the threads cut through the weave, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restrained by the weave on each side of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes give a strong indication, he should pierce them with a sharp spatulum which comes from under the eye, and dry up the white moistness and draw down the eyes, and then let him enter immediately; then he should extract it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the socket of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called "alkunnati" is not other than a tumor which has collected in the eye, resembling descending water, but it is not water; and the manner of its appearance is that you have the patient sit on a straight, prepared seat, then take his head in your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the tumor come out above your eyes; then it should be cured, and the light should descend and the patient should see things as he used to; and if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the descent of the tumor is not apparent as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you cause the patient to sit between your hands, then take the spatula and pierce the cornea with it slightly through the continuation of the conjunctive membrane with the cornea and the corona, until the pus issues; and when it has issued, drop into the eye hot water mixed with honey, or water in which fenugreek and honey have been boiled, and then let it be treated with another treatment until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of eye waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have discussed the appearance of abscesses in the division, and what must be done to pierce them; now act according to these instructions for the sake of health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	You should cause the patient to sit between your hands in front of light, away from the sun, and you should press the healthy eye firmly; then place the paper over the eye on your left hand if the eye is on the left, or on your right hand if it is on the right; then take in your right hand, if the eye is on the left, the instrument which is called "almagda", and vice versa if it is on the right; then place the point of the instrument next to the corona through the thickness of a hair in that white part of the eye where the tear duct emerges, and push the instrument called "almagda" skillfully, and turn your hand so that it pierces the white part of the eye, and you will feel that "almagda" has reached the hollow; and the depth of the channel of "almagda" should be equal to the thickness between the pupil and the edge of the iris; this is the corona of the eye; then you will see the bone in that paper through the clarity of the cornea, and then push the instrument down into the hollow, then express it under one channel after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the water is coming out now, then the patient can see his own instrument and himself in front of him.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting for a while, if the water rises up again by the second passage, push it down with the instrument and when it is firmly stuck and no longer rising, gently extract the almagda by turning your hand a little; then put some gem-water in again and remove the eye from that.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then insert an eyeball soaked in rose oil and abundance of egg white, and bind it with clean eye-oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are from our time, put on comfrey crushed with an abundance of egg white.Et si li aigue ne descend pas la seconde voie, puis remette l’oil de l’autre costé, et met par defuer sus leu de l’eyelet une piece de lainne moillie en oile roset; et lie almain avec l’oil sain.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are some people whose eyes are too hard, then you should take the instrument called "alberit", of which this is the shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And if the water does not go down the second passage, then insert an eyeball on the other side, and put over it a piece of linen soaked in rose oil; and bind it gently with clean eye-oil.And therefore pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not cut too deep, but make the slit subtle, then insert the almagda as we have said; and at the end of the procedure prepare for the patient a suitable dark sleeping place, so that he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and keep him quiet from all movements, and give him light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and tie it according to its disposition for three days; then untie it in that same dark house, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then put the eye back in until the seventh day; and you must not do this during the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but you should choose another time so that the water rises rapidly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	if such a boil comes, you must unleash the eye before the seventh day, and receive from him who soothes boils; and when it is appeased, then loosen the eyelid and place over his face the upper eyelid to cover any eye, and let him be in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then exit the house a little bit at a time, and return to his own bed; and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from the Land of Israel who told us that in his country they pierce with alum, and they suck out the fluid, but nonetheless I have never seen anyone do this in our land, nor have I ever read about it in books by the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagest, for those who do not know them can see them; and they are properly made of brass:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let the ends of these be of the same subtlety, and the hindmost have four points.
de la char sor le neis	of the heart above the diaphragm
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes, strange, deformed children are born, some of whom look like scorpions with many feet; and there are some with a hollow back of a red color, and others with a smooth back of a good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	For those of these children who are smooth and not hollow-backed, you must make the patient sit in your hands facing the sun; open their nostrils, and squeeze out any pus towards these children, and pull them hard; then cover what you can with a sharp, thin spatula on one side until you know that the pus is all gone.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains any thing which cannot be covered, open it with one of the subtle instruments lightly so that nothing remains; and if without it swells or an abscess forms, dry it as it should be; and if they are malignant abscesses, hasten to cauterize them until the pus is drained and all the corruption is removed, then pour on wine or vinegar.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If it works and moisture reaches the palate, you know he is healthy; and if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, you know that there is pus in the bone above, which prevents instruments from cutting: therefore, you must insert a thread of linen, about the thickness of a finger, and tie it to your finger, with a knot between each finger, either one or two knots; then place the end of the thread into the nostril of the patient, as far as he can bear it, and pull it through the nose until it comes out of the mouth; children often do this in school, and it is easy for anyone who wants to do it. Then hold one end, which comes out of the nose, in one hand, and the other end, which comes out of the mouth, in the other hand, and pull them gently apart while holding the thread taut.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do as much as you know that the nuts have corrupted this wood, then pull out the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before; do so for three days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of the flesh; and then put into the nose a plug of cotton for several days until it is healed, and if there is need for dry medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to cleanse the head, with which one distills oils and medicines into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be made of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a tube, and the conduit should also be made of the same material; and if you wish, make a closed tube, and let the instrument be full for purging the nose; and it should have a handle at the top to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the heart above the diaphragm
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "telul" arises at the top of the diaphragm, and grows and becomes large, so that it is visible to the eye; therefore you should cut it at the beginning, and remove all of it, then place the cautery or burning medicine on top; and if one delays cutting until it has become large, then beware if it is hard, of dark color, and lacking in feeling: do not touch it with iron, for it is an ulcerated abscess, because when one cuts it once, great harm comes to the patient. And if the abscess is due only to pressure, not due to dark color, and you see that one can cut it all away, then evacuate the patient and cut it without fear, and clean the area of dry and constricting substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the heart is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when the solution of continuity comes in one of these cartilage openings, it is beneficial to some people.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, when this happens to someone, examine if the wound is fresh and contains all its blood; and then bring together the two lips with a stitch, and cure it until it is healed; and if the lips are torn on both sides, you should scrape all parts of their skin until they heal, then bring together the two lips with a stitch, and tighten it, and strew powdered dragon's blood and incense powder over it; and put an ointment of strong plaster or other binding ointment over the powders, and leave it to heal by itself, then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of sewing is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the sewing of the belly; or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of lip abscesses
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At home, there are hard abscesses within the lips, resembling grains of wheat, smaller and larger; therefore, you should turn the lips inside out, and slit them on each knob, and pinch and cut into each part; then apply crushed vitriol to the incision, until the blood is stanched; then use the leechwort, and cleanse the area of dry matter until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of gum swelling
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times a growth arises on the gums, which the ancients call "albus"; you should hold it with tweezers, cut at its root, and let the blood or pus flow out; then place powdered vitriol, or other restraining and drying powders, over the site; if the growth returns after the incision, and this often happens, cut it again and cauterize it; if it does not return after cauterization, and this often happens, then these are the forms of estrume for coping.
des sordens	of the eyes, and to the
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Some are clustered at the top of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, and some are ugly and rough; and sometimes the teeth are black, yellow, or green, so that the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; so you should have the patient sit in your lap, and open his mouth wide, and inspect the teeth where the sores appear, until nothing remains; and thus you should do for blackness, and yellowness, and other discoloration, until they are clean; and if one is removed at first, it is good; if not, then repeat it again the next day or the third, until you have removed everything; and know that teeth require various forms of estrume to remove them, according to what the work demonstrates, so that the rasors with which one scrapes the teeth have different forms from those with which one scrapes between the teeth; and these forms and others should be with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you cure a tooth of its pain that you delay pulling it as long as you can, because no one should do this; because it is a very high substance until there is no excuse to pull it out.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then, when the patient is compelled to pull, you must be certain of your teeth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the pain deceives the patient and believes it to be in the tooth, and forces the good tooth; and even though the pain is not relieved by this, until the evil tooth is extracted, for we have already attempted this with these saints; and when you are certain of your teeth, you must scrape around the tooth all around, spitting strongly to push back the gum from all sides; then remove it with your fingers or with fine tweezers little by little, until it is well loosened, then grip tightly with the tweezers; and let the head of the patient be between your knees, and hold him firmly so that he does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	Then extract the tooth firmly without breaking it, and if it does not come out, take one of these instruments and insert it into each side gently, and move it as you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the teeth are pierced and loose, you should fill the holes with lint and gently constrict them with forceps so they don't break on extraction; you must work very gently around the gums to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be careful that you don't break it, or part of it remains, and the pain returns worse than before because of the root's sharp edge.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And beware of acting like ignorant surgeons who, in their haste and arrogance, sometimes break a tooth, or sometimes cause great illness due to the roots remaining, or the tooth breaking, as we have often seen. When a tooth is pulled, wash the socket with wine or garlic and vinegar; if bleeding ensues, which often happens, apply powdered vitriol; and if that doesn't work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of instruments, which make the teeth loose, have long points and thick handles so that they do not bend when you pull the tooth. These are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be made of large pieces so that they don't bend during pulling, and be made of good iron, and be serrated to hold the gums.
de la racine des dens	from the root of teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains in place, you must put wet cotton on the area for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the area is softened, then insert the tweezers called "algefri", which make the shoulder look like a sore neck; and inside they are made like a file and that is their form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots will not come out with all these tweezers, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root and insert the instrument called 'althali', that is, forceps, of which this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	Let it be sturdy and strong so as not to break, and if the root pops out through this, that is good; if not, then use all the instruments, of which the forms come below:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And let one assist with this instrument which has .ij. tips, of which this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools which are before in the reason of the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large tweezers, of which this is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this instrument be outside so that it does not break, and know that there are many dental instruments; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise master subtlety finds by himself his instrument, according to what his works and the disease show him, for there are many diseases in which the ancients did not teach any instrument because of their diversity; and if it does not break in the cart or the other bones, or it protrudes, then he seeks the instruments that he needs, which I have told you about, and helps with gestures, so here is its shape:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and well-fitting to hold the bone, so that it does not slip but can be held and removed; and then restore the site with appropriate medicines, and if there is a protuberance in the bone, and it is small, then cut it with all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to nature, and its shape is ugly, especially in young women, you should know if the tooth is new after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and cannot be filed or ground down; then cut it, and if there is an air-bubble with the tooth, take this instrument, of which here is the shape, and it is like a small beak, and it should be made of iron with a sharp point:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the gum recedes little by little day by day because of the hardness of the tooth and so that you do not move the others; and if it is apparent that one can be filed down, then file it with a file such as this, according to its shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is also like the file used to make needles; and file the tooth little by little day by day gently, so that it does not move until it fits; then smooth it at the end with a rasp, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, then file down the roughness until it is even, so that it does not cut the tongue or distort speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the tooth is loose:
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth is loose, whether from a blow or from falling, and the patient cannot bite on anything without bleeding, and you have treated them with constricting medicines but it does not work; then they must be restrained with a gold wire, because silver wire turns green and rusts, but gold never moves; and the wire should be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the amount of space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth inclining, take the wire and wrap it double between two healthy teeth, then place the loose tooth between the teeth with pliers, if there is one or more, until you reach bleeding at the healthy tooth on the other side; then restart the binding from where you began, straining your hand subtly and bleeding, until it does not move; and the ligature should be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then cover the teeth with a thread using tweezers, and bring them together, and secure them between the healthy teeth, and place it so that it does not hurt the tongue; then leave it tightly in place as long as it can stay, and if it comes loose, or the thread breaks, then tighten it with another thread; let it remain, and serve in this way throughout its life, and this is the shape of the teeth and the arrangement of the two healthy teeth, and the two rotten ones, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when a tooth falls out, it is reset in its place, little by little, as we have said; and no one who is not wise and experienced should attempt this, and sometimes the shape of a tooth from a cow's bone is made, and it is placed in the gap where the defect is, and it is held there as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover the wound in the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Sometimes this ligature occurs under the tongue due to nature, as people are born with it; or by accident from a wound that is stitched up; and the treatment is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and lay his head on your healthy shoulder, and hold his tongue; then cover the large nerve ligature so that the tongue is separated from its socket, and if there is hardening or growth due to a wound, then cut it with a pair of scissors and cover the ligature; and be careful that the incision is not too deep, lest you pierce the artery underneath; and when you have finished, wash the area with rosewater and garlic, or with cold water, then place a tent made of linen under the tongue; and tie the patient's tongue every night so that it does not heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if bleeding occurs, then apply powdered vitriol to the site; and if the blood congeals, then cauterize it with a lentigo cautery, which is good for this purpose; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it has turned purple or black, and the patient does not feel any pain, then do not touch it, as it is a chancre; and if it is inclined to become a blister, and there is moisture, then insert the needle, and open it with a thin spatumile, and release it from both sides; and if bleeding occurs due to your treatment, apply crushed vitriol until it stops, then return to your treatment until you draw out everything. Then rinse the area with rose water and salt water, and treat it with other remedies until it heals.
des apostemes de la gorge	of abscesses in the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes ulcers called "godath" occur in the throat; and they are properly called almonds, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then take care: if they are hard abscesses of a small size and a light color, do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron; but let it be until it is dead, and then you will separate it, or it will burst by itself; and if it is of a white color and the root is thin, have prepared the instrument for covering, but first check that the abscess is calm and pacified.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then have the patient sit facing the sun, and his head be in your hand, and open his mouth and hold the instrument between your hands, and press the tongue underneath it, with which this is done; and let it be of silver or thin brass like a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	As you press the tongue against this instrument, and see the abscess, take a needle and insert it into the tonsil, and pull it out above as hard as you can; and draw out some of the pus with it, then cover the instrument again, so that it is ready for use. It has a very sharp point, and the tip curves in one direction or another, and it is made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, cover it with tongs, of which the shape is like this:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And it is cut on one side, and named on the other; and when you have cut one of the glands, then cut the other according to the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and water and garlic, and if bleeding occurs, then gargle the patient with water, or with scorched pomegranate peels, or with bay leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then cure it until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses besides the two glands appear in the throat, so cut them then just as the two glands are cut.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, namely a small abscess; and it had swollen almost closed throughout the throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passageway which was blocked, and she could not eat or drink, and would have died if it continued for one or two more days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess had become so swollen that it had forced out two hairs from the nose holes.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I hastened therefore, and pushed in the hook into one of the nostrils, then the abscess was torn open, and a large amount of pus came out; then I did the same in the other nostril hole, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards I pushed the hook into the abscess, and scraped away some of it, and only a little blood came out; thus the passageway of the throat was cleared for the woman, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting at the abscess for a long time; and the abscess grew again, filling up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large; so I lanced it in the throat: thus it did not grow again; and I left those parts, and did not know what became of her afterwards.
de l’uve	of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When a tumor descends upon the eye, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; but if it is thick and round beneath, it is called an "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it has been drained as we have said in the division, and the drainage does not help, and you see that the pus is abated, and it is thin, then you should cut it; but if it is round and not long, and it is blood-colored or dark-colored, then you should avoid cutting into it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger in doing so.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it according to the manner that I have described, of its whiteness and length, you should cause the patient to sit facing the sun, and press his tongue against the instrument that we have mentioned earlier; then insert the needle into the eye, and draw it out from underneath, and cut it at one of the two instruments that I spoke of in the incision of the two almonds.Et li dis, qu’il ne bouge mie, si non que tu le presse a l’estrument quant il est fiche; car par la pression s’est a l’uve, et par la pression s’est a l’esgoutte, s’il plait a Dieux.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you must not cover anything more than the excess that is beyond the natural term; for if you cover more, it weighs down the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two testicles, and cure it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear from covering, then you should use the cautery of the sense of fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is for acute fever.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of the cautery is as follows: The patient puts his head on your lap, and then presses his tongue against the instrument we have described in the chapter on cauterization, and breathes in hot air, not too thick or too clear; and uses the instrument thus:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it has a handle at its head where the medicine is placed, like the handle of a spoon, and the instrument is pressed into the eye with all the medicine; and the patient lies on his side, so that the saliva and mucus flow from the mouth due to the medicine, so that it does not go down the throat and cause vomiting; then hold your hand over the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour, until you see it become numb and the stinging of the medicine is soothed. If you see something, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into the cotton on the eyelid, so that the cotton lies on the eye; do this often until the cautery is complete, then let it dry for four or five days. If you need to renew the cautery with medicine, do so, and after the cautery wash around the eye with cold water, and treat it with gargles until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision or cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this way, take calendula and hyssop and marjoram and rue and chamomile and avens and similar herbs, and mix them all or some of them into one pot, and add garlic, and let it boil. The pot should be well glazed with strong clay, and the pot has a handle shaped like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it can be made of silver or bronze, and one of the ears is placed in the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the eye through the canal until the eye is mortified; then he should do this often until the eye dries up, and take care not to do this at the beginning of the occurrence of a hot abscess, for many things can happen; nor do this beyond the decline of a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and place an egg white inside the tip so that the mouth of the patient is not too hot; because the egg white will not let the vapor burden the mouth, and it is a good remedy together with health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times a fish bone or spine, or some other thing, becomes lodged in the throat; therefore you should try to remove whatever you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with the entire instrument, so that you can move the object; and if it does not reveal itself and is stuck in the throat, you should make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps the object will come out through vomiting. Or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a dry piece of bread; and tie a string to the sponge, then swallow it; and when it reaches its destination, it will stick there, and then you can pull it out; and if it does not come out as we have said, take an instrument made of soft lead according to this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And the instrument should be curved at the tip so that it can more easily enter the throat, and the tip should be lifted upward; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, or it may be torn, nor should you push the bone in; and move it so that the patient swallows the instrument, so that he can feel where the object is stuck; then he should swallow the instrument, or pull it out with the instrument, equally, until it is out.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the blood from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Sometimes the medicine is blood, as I said in the division, through the cure of medicines; and when this does not help, then look into the throat of the patient towards the sun, then press his tongue with the instrument that I told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the blood, draw it out with a small hook or fine tweezers suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, take a curved cane and insert it into the throat of the patient, then heat the tip of the cane, and do this frequently.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient has a fever all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Take a full glass of cold water and open the mouth and pour it in without swallowing, and move it around with their hand frequently; as soon as they feel the water, it will come out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not come out as we have said, then suffocate the patient with assafetida using the instrument I described for the fumarole of the throat; do this many times, as it will come out without causing any harm.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the way to do the fumarole is to take a pot with burning charcoal and cover it with a perforated lid in the middle, and put the tip of the instrument into the hole; then pour your fumarole into it, and the patient should put their mouth onto the pipe, close their mouth so that no smoke escapes, but comes to their throat; and the blood will come out now, and if it does not, repeat the fumarole many times; and let the patient be thirsty, and eat salty and sour foods, and do not drink any water; and then they will need to go to the bathroom because of this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument used to draw out the blood is, when one can see it, like curved tweezers that can enter the throat; it is similar to a surgeon's forceps, and has roughness from lime, so that it can grasp firmly. See its shape here:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	There are many kinds of abscess that appear, according to what the recollections that come later in this book from one and another, and they differ in puncturing and size; and there are two ways in which one is in its own likeness, and in what it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for the places where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and the abscesses of fleshy places are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in action.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if one must not pierce abscesses as long as the bowels are calm according to their completion; and there are some that one should pierce when they become cruel, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses that are near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	Because when abscesses develop near the joints and are left untreated until they are pus-filled, it is likely that the ligaments and nerves of the joint will become damaged, causing contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	If the abscess is near the principal limb and you delay piercing it until it has become pus-filled, it will harm the principal limb; if it is near the anus, it should be pierced so that it can drain, but only after digestion is complete, except for one that is near the anus, which must not be allowed to fester inside and lengthen, but should instead be drained immediately so that a fistula does not form and healing takes a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you must know the time of the rupture of the abscess which is dead according to its completion, and that is when the pain is relieved, and the departure of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and from the softening and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and you must make the rupture in the most dependent part of the abscess, and where it appears to move; and let the rupture be made in the longest part of the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and on nerves and arteries, and in all places equally where there is no fold.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	For those who bend, depending on the limb involved.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in fleshy places, it is better to wait until after digestion is complete before piercing them, as we have said.Et quant il est delez lou membre principal, et tu ne veillies le perforer tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, fuers que il soit meurez entor, si nuira au membre principel; et est grant dolur a celui qui le por; et li maux est plusors foiz perilluz.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before this, the body's veins will be torn, and it is full of filth; and perhaps the lips and its depths will harden.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is an abscess that should be punctured according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And one must treat small abscesses with small punctures, and large abscesses with large punctures and many slits according to the appearance of their size; and in such abscesses where it is necessary to split the skin, and cover; when it has become as soft as a dress, and is deadened, then one must do as they do with blisters: and there are some which are split into three angles, and some of which are covered just like a myrtle leaf, so are abscesses of the nails; and there are some where one makes a round incision, and other incisions, and similar covers.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who have no head, such as a superficial boil, you must pierce it plainly; and when the boil is large and has drawn up a great blister, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the blister in one hour, but some of it; then stop the boil until the next day, then draw out something again from it; do this several times, from great to small, until the blister is completely released; likewise if the patient is of weak constitution, or a woman carrying child, or a small child, or an old decrepit man.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the pus sometimes jumps out with the release of the blister, and the patient might die without your realizing it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, handle this chapter with great caution; and when you have pierced your boil, wash the wound, and see if the wound of the boil is small; and if it is a plain cut, then apply bandages of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large boil with many openings, then you should place a tent in each opening so that they press against one another; and if you have cut into the boil in part, and the skin around it has been cut, then you should fill it with dry cotton or rags of unbleached linen without moisture, and leave it for three days; then remove it and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs in your work, bring cold water and ease, and wet the cloth, and place it over the bleeding area many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding persists, apply treatment and care, and the powders I mentioned earlier in this book; and if it is in the winter, and the area is very nervous, then you should place wet tents and cloths soaked in warm wine and oil over it; and if it's in the summer, and the area is fleshy, then you should place wet cloths soaked in water and oil, or cold wine and oil, for a third of the day, as we have said; then release the abscess, wash and treat it, as appropriate, until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And now you should know generally about the treatment of abscesses; I have told you how to proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter on it.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	From the head come small abscesses, and they are caused by people who wear hats, just as the ears of a chicken are, and there are many variations of this type.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fat and smooth where there is moisture as well as pulp; and there are some that are hard and stony in texture, and there is no doubt if the artery does not make them contrary.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the body is that you should test with every instrument called "trocar", whose form comes afterwards, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, they open it from above and draw out the long one.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is evacuated, they scorch without leaving anything behind of the membrane that contains the moisture, for it returns again if anything is left behind; then plunge cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and salt, and apply this to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and those who are left overnight will be cured.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then resume the cotton, as before, on the second and third days, until you know well that it does not stay through the night; then heal the wound with ointment that is appropriate, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess contains pus, cut it open along its length; and gouge out your eyes, and scrape off all the scabs, and put all your treatment on drawing out the pus under the skin; and if the artery does not respond, then do what I told you after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do this for a stone-abscess, cutting and treating it as I have said.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the incision on the stone-abscess is lighter, because they are full of blood.Et si li artere ne fuit pas, si mettés li chié sus li berlingot, et li muesche a li costez, et li sienge au bout de la verge, et li vachez a l’autre cap; et prendes une fiole d’or et une de verre, et le piez ou il gist, et mettes li cief sus li berlingot, et le corps sus li piez, et les piés sus li sienge, et li col sus li vachez.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if there is no moisture in any of these abscesses, either on the head or elsewhere, then I have seen such abscesses on the head of an old woman; and found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and could not be broken; and if anyone had cut it open, they would have made a wound just like a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	For other abscesses that come on the head, except for those that come on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should be in the most dependent part, so that the pus can flow out; and treat them as they ought to be treated.
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times abscesses come on the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes elsewhere in the body, and they are large, and some are connected to each other.And these that come on the head, and those that come on children, if they have no moisture, and are not broken open, then they are called 'stone-abscesses'. And they cause great pain, and often kill the patient, and sometimes they can be found in the neck, armpit, groin, or elsewhere in the body. They are large and hard like a stone, and if cut open they will bleed profusely just like a wound from a stone.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And every scrofula is properly within its coat, as the nodule and abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many similar scrofulae.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are some that are malignant and will not respond to treatment.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Therefore, if you see one that is of a good disposition for cauterization, and resembles the color of the body, and is soft in every part, and not adherent to the nerves of the neck or artery or duct, and is not deep; then you should cut it from above, and scrape away each part, and have the two lips of the wound cut back, if necessary, as we have said for abscesses of the head; and draw out a little at a time, being careful not to cut any nerve or vein, and not using forceps or knives that might cause the hand to slip, and do not go too deep, so that you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, then put ground glass in the wound, or some powder that stops bleeding, and press on the wound; and leave it until the abscess is eased, and the wound softens, and begins to fester.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the bleeding is stopped, return to your work, until you complete it; then look with your finger for any small scabs, and cut them out and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein in the root of the ulcer, you should not cut the ulcer at its root, but tie it off with a strong double thread, and let it fall without harm; then dress the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then heal it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut the whole ulcer, you should bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now, so that no excess remains due to the size of the ulcer.Et si tu troves en la plaie grant quantite de sangue qu’il ne se peut estaincher a ton ovraige, si covient que tu metes li sur la plaie un panne, et le tiens fort; puis emporte li sang, et laisse li panne adessuz tant qu’il soit estanchié.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	then you must understand how to cover the root of it, and pull it out, and cut it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofulae that have a superfluity, pierce where it shows pus; and pierce in the same way as the one mentioned before, depending on it, then treat it with tenting along with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what is left of the corruption; and when the wound is clean, then treat it with an ointment binding flesh, until it is healed.
de squinance	from squint
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is a written record of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those with squint, the flap of skin in the throat known as the "epiglottis" should be cut; and this is done to aid them, because all the veins and the pormon are affected by the illness in those who have a hot abscess in their mouth, or in their throat or in both testicles.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the channel of the pormon, one must cover the epiglottis to avoid loss of life due to strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we want to split the epiglottis, we should split it below III circles or IV a little split across, between the II circles or by the quantity of the split in the hyoid bone, not at all in the cartilage; and those places which are suitable for the splitting of the epiglottis so that there is no flesh in it, and the vessels are long from there.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, he should stretch the skin of the throat all the way to the Adam's apple, then split the windpipe until it reaches the voice box; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then cut the larynx, as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the windpipe of the voice box which jumps out through the hole that is broken, and by the lack of voice; and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed that we doubt strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound from the heart, and sew it up entirely without the cartilage; then administer medicines which promote flesh growth, until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says that one should not do this until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is judged to be near death, and the deficiency of blood has been restored.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then cut the epiglottis so that the patient cannot choke, and he can breathe through the wound, and thus is guarded from death; and therefore the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the fury of the disease had passed, and it passes in 3 or 4 days. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and treat it, until it was healed; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw a maiden take a knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the muscles of her neck; and I was called to heal her, and found her as good as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found that blood had come out of it, and that she had not coughed up any phlegm or spittle except what came out through her throat, and the wind was coming out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried and stitched the wound and healed her until she was healed; and the maiden had nothing but a hoarse voice, and returned afterwards to her natural state; therefore I say that one should have no fear in cutting the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This hernia of the throat is called a "hernia of the throat," and it is a large abscess in the color of yolk, and it is very common in women; and it occurs in two ways: naturally, and accidentally; in the natural way there is no danger.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accident occurs in two ways, one of which is similar to a cyst, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from an artery; and there is danger in it, and one should not operate with force unless it is small, and test and examine throughout the entire orifice: if you find it like a cyst, and it cannot be removed by any means, cut it as one cuts a cyst, and treat it to the full extent of its depth; examine thoroughly, and cure it as it should be cured.
des nous	from us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways of doing this, all of which I will describe, and now I must explain the difference between a cut and a dislocation.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that an issue is a fever and chills while the eruption has not yet passed and the rash is complete; then the fever and chills cease.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With a cut there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a boil, and becomes swollen; and they are according to two appearances, either dry or moist, and very colorful, as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	You should, when you come to the treatment of the nose, test and examine it first with all the instruments called "endoscopic", according to what its shape will allow in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the method of inquiring into abscesses is that you press on the most moist part that you find in the abscess, and twist your fingers gently, until you feel that the pus has broken through the skin, then it depends on the size of the abscess; then extract the instrument, and be careful about what comes out.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the moisture runs quickly, whatever its color, treat it as I have said for other abscesses; and if after an incision no moisture comes out, know that it is fat, so cut it in a cross pattern and take it with tweezers, and lightly scrape each side, and guard the skin where it lies, drawing it healthy with the nail; and if you cannot draw it healthy, then draw it in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if nothing remains, it will return to the nose many times; and if a little remains, and the pain troubles you, then employ the wound with some corrosive powders, and tighten the wound, and place soothing hot abscess remedies on it, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed; and if the nose is large, then cut the two lips of the wound, and treat it as one who has a pus-filled sore.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the wound is bleeding profusely, and it is contrary to you or another, then quickly apply ground vitriol, and leave it for two days or three until the wound festered and stop the bleeding; then return to covering what has been left exposed.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of the probing instruments, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are three types of points, which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb"; and there are also three kinds: large, medium, and small, to probe abscesses of fistulas; and they are like the needles with which sorcerers are pierced, made from brass, iron, or silver, and those that are yellow prove more effective than black lead in probing the sinuses of fistulas; and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the opening.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of the probes are very similar, as you can see: large, medium, and small; and there are probes with two curves of three kinds as well; and there are probes with three curves, and they are also of three kinds; and there are probes with two curves, and probes with only one curve, and they too are of three kinds; and all these are necessary in their respective places.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The heads of these tools are sharp, and there are some that do not cut further than one side, which is used to scrape the teeth, so as not to pierce the vein or nerve. These instruments have handles with hooks, so that the patient does not bleed to death when opening an abscess; they come in three sizes: large, small, and medium, as you can see. They are only used on fleshy parts, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar areas; sometimes a small instrument resembling a finger is also made, according to this form, with which blood is staunched.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is sometimes placed in the area that heals by stopping the flow of blood from the veins and arteries, and sometimes they are cut according to this large form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell up when they become infected, so that they look like women's breasts; they remain ugly and swollen, and if one wants to cure them, they must be treated according to this formula from line .b to .g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	then scorch the fat, and fill the wound with medicine, then stitch together the two lips of the wound, and treat it until it is healed; and if the nipple sags downward, and becomes soft because of its size as happens to women, then make two similar incisions above it; so that one is attached to the other at the end of each, in such a way that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from letter .b. to letter .g.; then scorch the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and treat it with what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary in the treatment, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient will not rest, or due to bleeding, then you should fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it dissolves the remaining flesh and fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the armpit
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	This abscess that comes under the armpit is like a hard scrofula, and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus inside the abscess has been drained, employ the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and treat it with appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is like scrofula, they should proceed as we have said in the treatment of scrofula, and if the wound becomes pus-filled, they should apply cauterization as we have described earlier.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of an artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is exposed and the skin above it is swollen, there often occur abscesses; and so too with the vein, it becomes swollen and abscessed. One can tell which it is by its appearance: if it is an artery, the abscess will be long and deep; and when you touch it with your fingers, you feel a pulsation. And when it is a vein, there is a deflation evident around it. It is foolish to cover up this kind of abscess, especially when it occurs under the armpits, or on the arms, neck, or in many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore one should avoid cauterizing with iron, and if there is an abscess on the head, it should also be avoided; and with one that is due to vein inflammation, cut through the skin from above down to the long artery; then open the artery widely at the edges, and separate it from the veins, so that it is exposed; then insert a needle under the artery, and pierce it all the way through to the other side, and bind the artery with a double thread in two places, according to how I taught you for the extraction of the two temporal arteries; then pierce the spot between the two threads with an introducer, so that the blood flows out from within, and release the abscess. Then administer treatment with warm bowels, until the thread slips down; then cure it with suitable ointments, until it is healed. And if the abscess is due to vein incisions, you should dye your hand with something taken from the abscess all over the skin, then insert a needle under the spot that you hold in your hand, and pierce it through, and put a double thread through it, so that you draw it through to the other side; then tie the abscess as I have told you, at one of the two ends of the thread. And if you are afraid that the thread will slip out, insert another needle all the way through the thread under the whole abscess at the incision of the first needle, and bind the thread in four places; then lance the abscess so that the superfluity flows out, then lance the superfluity of the skin and leave what is tied; then put a moist cloth soaked in wine and oil over it, then administer treatments with poultices and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, as abscesses come in the artery and vein, they come to the nerves when they are hurt, or from too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often in the shoulders and elbows and all over where there are joints, and it is a painful abscess, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in various conditions without pain; and when one presses on it properly, the patient feels pain, and it is not deep in the body but under the skin; and it hurts all over, and does not move forward or backward, nor down nor up, and that which is in joints should not be covered by iron: otherwise there might be contraction; and that which is on the head or forehead, treat with a plaster.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, grasp it with tweezers and pull out the root; but if it is large, slit it with a blade, then scrape away the pus, remove the bone, and close the wound by sewing it up, then heal it.
des grosses boces pendans	large bumps hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Sometimes it happens in the abdomen and nowhere else; it is a disease called "fungus" because of its resemblance to ears, with thin roots and thick leaves. There are both small and very large ones; I saw a man who had two on his stomach that looked more like fungi than anything else, with no difference between them, white in color, with fine roots, and split open, from which moisture flowed.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I cut them open and found one weighing 18 ounces and the other 6 ounces; the treatment for this is to incise if the disease is moist, and the color of the joint is white and moist with fine roots; then use a wide spathe, and have at hand the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For when cutting there are often excessive blood losses, and if the blood runs out, then quickly use the cautery; and if you see the patient terrified and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-prepared thread and tie the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days; then restrain it, and do not stop compressing with the thread until it cuts the joint, and the pieces come off without effort; and if the roots are large, then there is fear of cutting into the abdomen, but you can cut half of it, then cauterize it so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and beware of cutting the skin which is of a dull color and lacking in sensation and resembling milk.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is a deep abscess, and I will come to the treatment of sores next.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil bursts
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the boil comes from cauterization of a wound or from an ulcer in the syphilis, and is on the belly and in some of the bowels, as happens in other routs, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from wind; and if it is from the rout of syphilis and from the outlet of the bowel, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a minor thing without pain, and it opens from various outlets.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is through the outlet of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it with their fingers, it recoils, and then returns, and sometimes it becomes serrated, and grows larger at the entrance of the bath and from great exertion.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a minor thing, and it opens well when you press it with your hand, and it does not constrain; and if it is due to blood, then the abscesses open through these signs of large and hard boils, and they are stuck according to a certain quantity; and if it is due to wind, then there is a whistling sound when touched, and the action is such that you should look to see if the appearance is due to blood from an artery or vein, or wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	Let the wound heal.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, because of the artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is in the intestine or bowels, then you must instruct the patient to tighten his belt and lie stretched out straight; then sign all around the swelling, and then command him to lie still between your hands while you go around the area you have marked for the spasm; then stretch the abscess open at the top halfway down the nail, and tie it tightly with a strong thread or cord of strong silk; then work the other half of the abscess stretched out over the string, and push your finger into the intestine; if you find it caught by the string, untie it and push the intestine back inside the belly; and if you find the bowels, take hold of them at the nail and cut away the excess; and if the artery or vein is causing problems, go about your work and take two needles and thread two strong threads through them; then pierce what you have marked with a cross as though you were piercing it, and stretch the abscess open in four places over the needles; then, when you see it, remove the needles and let the wound heal on its own, and scrape away the dead flesh; if it is thin and healing, then clean it and dress it as needed; draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound as appropriate and close it up.
dou chancre	from cancer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have discussed in the division the similarities of cancer, and how one should work with medicine, and how one should avoid the cure of iron; and they say that ancient people believed that when cancer is in a place where one can scrape it, like cancer which is in breasts, and in the thigh, and in similar places, one must completely remove it when it is in its beginning stages. And when it is old and large, one should not approach it, for I have never been able to heal any of them; nor has anyone ever healed any before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatments, when it is in a place where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile; then let them fester if there is a sign of fullness, then open the wound . Then cut off the cancer, and the hair from all parts, and the bone from all parts without leaving anything; and let the blood flow out freely, and squeeze the wound with your hand or something else, and if the bleeding from the artery or vein makes you feel uncomfortable, cauterize it until the blood vessels are closed; then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already discussed in the division the appearances of dropsy, and how the gathering of water occurs, and the signs of each appearance, and the treatment that is performed by medication, and that which is cured by iron; only [the latter] is described. One must not use iron on these two appearances: that is, tympanites and hydrops, for this is a deadly thing. Therefore, when you treat this appearance of dropsy, which is called 'eclites', with medication, and the cure does not help, then consider if the patient is weak, or has another illness other than dropsy, such as dysentery and similar conditions; one must not use iron, for there is doubt. But if you see a strong person who only has dropsy, and he is neither too young nor too old, one should proceed in this way: lift the patient straight up by your hands, and the attendant presses the belly by pushing the water to its lowest part under the foot, then take the spathulum according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And make an incision of 2 parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And make an incision of 2 parts. And yet it must not be so deep that it reaches the intestines when you push it in, and it must not bleed; then check if the dropsy is on the side of the intestines: if it is due to a liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the abdomen 3 fingers down; and if it's due to the spleen, it should be on the right, and the patient must not lie on the incision so that the fluids do not flow to that weak spot; then pierce the skin all around with a needle, and squeeze it, and leave your hand on the whole spastic area between the skin and the syphon as you would when skinning, to the thickness of a fingernail or an inch; then pierce the syphon until the fluid comes out, and that is where the water is located, then draw it out, and insert this instrument from which the mold will come out:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a silver-colored wire, and is made of bronze or lightweight steel, and has in the lower part a small hole; and on one side, three holes; and two on the other, and one on the other; and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that the scribes make to trim the quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	at the top of this is the handle, so that when the instrument reaches its destination, it is drawn up to the instrument immediately; therefore empty half or a third of it, for if you empty more than is appropriate in that hour, by chance the patient may die from the shock of the instrument, or he will faint, or he will come close to death; but empty according to the quantity of his strength, and according to what the dispositions of his strength indicate, and his pulses; then withdraw the instrument and retain the water, which is now retained by the membrane that blocks the hole above the syphon, about which I have spoken, in such a way as you pierce it according to this method; then reinsert the instrument the next day if you see the patient able to endure it, and withdraw a little water; do this on one day, and be careful not to overdo it until he has no more water but just a little.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	If you doubt the disease, and you leave it with a lot of water, then cure it with a warm grave or sand, and by much sweating or bathing, and in the sun; and dye it with drink; and cure it with medicines that dry up until it is healed, and cauterize over the stomach and over the liver and over the spleen after the extraction of the fluid, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born without a foreskin, or with a small foreskin, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If necessary, cut it with a very sharp knife according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place the foreskin with a subtle slit in the glans, and ligate it and hold it thus for three or four days, and when he wants to urinate, then remove the ligature, and he will urinate, and then replace it; and perhaps it is not necessary at all, because the urine that comes out does not allow it to close.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those with small wounds, if treated with a plaster of honey, as we have said, will broaden.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have an opening in their place are bleeder, for some are born with an opening at the head of the penis, which prevents them from urinating before they lift their penis upwards; and they cannot ejaculate because the material cannot reach the glans, and this is a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, then the head of the penis and foreskin are cut to the size of a feather, so that the incision is in the middle, as it should be; and you must guard against bleeding which often occurs, and if it does, then stanch it with something that stanches blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these blisters come on the penis, and they have an unseemly appearance; and there are harmful ones and harmless ones; so you must take them with a very sharp knife, cut them and clean them all out, then put on wet cotton with Egyptian ointment; then cure it with thin ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, discolored and putrid, then you must apply cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cut it, and if the ulcer is on the penis, and part of it is inside and part outside, then you must first remove the ulcer that is inside; and when it is healed, then treat the one outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you heal them together, the skin of the penis is not secure and can be pierced, causing darkness and corruption inside the penis and testicles; so you must cut away all that is black and rotten, then apply a plaster made of honey and flour, from pomegranate bark and herbs, then heal it with further treatments until it is cured.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if there is a bleeding, apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery has two uses: for bleeding and for corruption; and if the head of the penis is damaged and withdrawn, one must insert a lead pipe into the urethra and the patient should urinate through it; and when there is hair at the tip of the penis due to an uncircumcised person, either from a wound or an abscess, one must scrape it with a chisel-like instrument, so that the ligatures are loosened and the head of the penis is freed from all sides; and if it is a difficult thing to discuss, one should scrape it with a spatula-like instrument at the urethra and the skin; then pull gently between them, and place a thin damp linen cloth in cold water so that it does not become erect again.
de la circoncision	on circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a matter of continuous dissection like other wounds; nevertheless, when we perform this act intentionally and properly on infants, it is necessary for us to do the best and most gentle job for their well-being.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not mention the circumcision of their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experimentation.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Because I have seen the majority of masters and surgeons who made circumcisions all around, and on many occasions, and on a single newborn; the foreskin would then heal because there were two membranes, and sometimes one would be cut above and the other remained beneath.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Now they recover by covering, and the pain is doubled, and with the cleaning which is done on the penis is not secure the tip of the member; and in the cleaning of the nail sometimes the iron slips, and ruins the work, and many times are born so that they do not need to be cleaned and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the cleaning that is done on the scrotum, I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the testicles are cut justly above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because when you press your hand, you cut evenly in I all the time; but let the thread be well stretched around the skin; and let the manner of the first work be that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are not forcing him to tie the thread around the wand only, and then make him pull it in all the ways you can; then let him stand between your hands straight, and support the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the wand and breathe on the heart, and draw it up so that the head of the wand is in; then cleanse it well from the filth that has gathered there, then tie the place marked with a double thread, then tie it under I to the other bond; and hold it by the second bond with the index finger and thumb, and press between the two bonds, then lift the heart quickly and draw the head of the wand; then let the blood run little by little, for this is the wound; and put powder on top of the powder the cloth glued with a cooked egg yolk tempered with rose water, confited with good and fresh rosemary oil, and leave it on until the next day, and cure it with another cure until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The shape of the forces at the mouthing is as follows: both sides are to be thin and sharp, and the ears should be as big as the palm of the hand equally.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	the error of the purification is when the pus within the incision has dried up; therefore you must extend it with your fingernail so that the wound forms an abscess; and scrape it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then hold it with tweezers and scrape it.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it persists for 3 days, and that which is under the foreskin is swollen, then let it be until the abscesses are calm and the skin is lightly scraped; then scrape it as much as you can, and beware of the part of the foreskin, it will not harm him in any way.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore treat the area of the wound with powdered medicine, as we have said in the treatise on powders; and if one scrapes too much from the core, and it goes upward, it will not harm him; therefore cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	from the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to the presence of a stone, or frozen blood, or bowels, or birth matter, or similar things that we have described in the division. And if the urine is not released and you see that the retention is caused by the stone which is lodged at the neck of the bladder, then the patient should bend over his knees; and his feet should be placed on his back, and he should press his abdomen from above the back, and restrain himself as much as he can. This forces the neck of the bladder to express the stone upwards, causing the urine to flow. And if it does not come out as we have described, and the patient feels great pain, then you must use an instrument called a 'syringe', which has this form: it should be made of thin silver like the feathers of a bird; the tube should be about a palm and a half in length, and thin at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the way of the emission of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie to the end a little wool or cotton, and put the end of the thread into the syringe; and squeeze out the superfluity of the wool and fill it up to the end of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg white; and let the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and the penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water; then gently put the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then tie the penis above towards the testicles; then fill the syringe up to the bladder, and feel the patient urinate until the bladder is empty, and if this is not done according to this order, because the person who leads it there is wrong; then extract the thread all the way through the wool, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out, and let the urine flow; and repeat the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scabs or blood comes into the bladder, or pus is accumulated there, and you see it oozing out with water and medicine, then do everything using the instrument called "clepsydra", and that is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed and has three openings: two on one side and one on the other, as you can see; and the hollow cheved where the medicine is applied should be such that it blocks the penis without addition, so that one can withdraw moisture and reinsert when necessary; and when you see your medicines moving in the bladder, place the end of the catheter into the moisture and suck out the moisture that is within; then insert the catheter firmly, and the moisture will enter inside and go to the bladder immediately, so that the patient feels it; and this is the form of the subtle catheter with which one cathesizes the bladder: thus it is:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is made of silver or brass, and the tip is higher up; and below there is one testicle or both testicles hanging; then take a mutton bladder and put the moisture that you want to cathesize the bladder into it, then tie it between the two testicles with a strong double string, and heat this moisture over a fire; then insert the tip of the catheter into the penis, then squeeze your hand over the bladder gently so that the moisture comes into the bladder; and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it, and pierce it all around; then tie the string firmly through these openings, then assemble the circle as one assembles a wheel, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and attach it to the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, squeezing your hand so that the moisture comes into the bladder.
de la piere	of stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already spoken in the division of stones, and their extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone in the testicles, and all the signs, and which type of stone one must work on in surgery; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is in the bladder occurs most often in children, and it is a sign that the urine flows from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and it appears hairy, and causes pain to the patient, and they can urinate many times, and then they become constipated; and many of these have a hernia; and the healing is much easier in children until they are 4 years old, and it is much more serious in the elderly, and it is in between youth and old age, for those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is much easier in those who have large stones than in those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient through an enema, to draw out all the feces that are in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it sometimes blocks the search for stones.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet and turn him upside down so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes comes out from above; then let him sit between your hands with his hands under his thighs so that the bladder is completely tilted downward; then probe and feel around inside it; if you feel the stone in the space, then hurry and cut on the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not come out with touching from the top, then wet your index finger of your left hand with oil, if the patient is old, or with your middle finger, if the patient is an adolescent; and insert it into his anus, and probe for the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, push it toward the neck of the bladder; then press on your finger, and draw it out to where you want to cut.Et s’ele ne chiet pas al col de la vessie, si lache ton doi et ta main, et quier a nouel entree le col de la vessie; et s’ele descende au parfond, si quier la piere dedens, et s’ele ne se moue point sus li col, si quier al costez; et s’ele chiet a l’espaice, si taille sus l’espaice qui est entre le col et la piere.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and instruct the patient to extend his testicles upward with his right hand, and with his left hand pull back the skin underneath the testicles in the area where the incision is made; then insert the spatulum, which has a curved shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And they cut between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the navel; and let it be straight on the stone, and both fingers be on the anus, and let the incision be diagonal so that it is wide at the top and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large; perhaps it presses so much on the finger which is in the anus that it comes out without effort; and know that there is a kind of stone where there are angles and edges: this is difficult to extract; and there is a kind that is below, similar to a grape, and round, whose extraction is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And for that kind where there are angles and edges, make the incision larger; and if it does not come out, you must grip it with pincers which are like a file at the tip, to pull out the stone so that it does not escape; or you insert under it an instrument with a curved tip; and if you cannot grab it thus, then widen the opening and, if there is bleeding, stop it with vitriol; and if there is more than one stone, first insert the largest at the neck of the bladder, then push upwards, then pull it out, and finally the smaller ones.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then it needs to be sutured, and a larger wound made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things can happen to the patient: either they die, or the urine comes out through the wound that cannot heal; but nevertheless, keep pulling with tweezers, until you have pulled it out in pieces; and when you have finished your work, then dress the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and compress it, and put a wet cloth on top soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then re-bind the scrotum to the body, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, wash the site well with oil and water, then treat the wound with thin ointment and thick ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if hot abscesses and corrosions and congealed blood come in the wound and the urine is retained, which is known in such a way that it comes out with the urine: then pierce your finger in the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and burst; then wash the wound with water and vinegar and salt, and aid him in every way you know how, until he is healed; and it is necessary that each hour that you treat him, you tie his two thighs together, and assemble the remedies on the spot.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is in the passage of the penis, and lodged there, and the urine cannot pass; then the cure of what I have said before, that you cut it many times, is an excuse for not cutting it with this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have tried this myself.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take a piece of iron according to this shape and let it be spiked at three angles on a poker:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then push the needle into the penis gently, until it reaches the stone; and turn the needle in your hand inside the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side; then the urine will come out at once, then press your hand on what is left of the stone that is inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is broken at once, and comes out with the urine, then the patient is cured; and if you cannot do this for any reason that causes pain, then tie a thread below the stone and another above, then cut the penis between the two threads, then pull the stone out, and untie the thread and cleanse the congealed blood in the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of women's stones
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It sometimes happens that a stone becomes lodged in a woman's body, and if it does, the cure is difficult, and is forbidden for three reasons: one is that the woman might be a virgin; the second is that one cannot find a skilled woman who will submit to examination, especially if she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman who is skilled in this art of medicine; and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman is more embedded than that of a man, so it requires a deeper incision, and there is great fear involved. And if necessity arises, one should take a needle and pierce it, and if one cannot find a needle, then one should use a very fine castor's hair; and one should present a small mirror to the woman, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command in the examination of the stone. And be sure to look carefully whether the woman is a virgin: then she must press her thumb into the vagina and seek out the stone; and if she finds it, she must hold it under her thumb, and one must urge her to press her left hand firmly over the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If you find it, you should move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then press on the stone at the root of the thigh towards the middle of the groin, where the muscle is moved; and feel the stone in that part; and do not move your finger above or below the stone, and let the incision be small at first; then enlarge the wound if you feel the stone as sharp as the wound so that the stone can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely, small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and those with bumps.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	And if you know their appearances to identify the exit.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood comes out, put ground vitriol on it and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your work so that the stone can come out, and have the tools I told you about when extracting a stone from men to aid you in your task; and if the blood comes out and it is from the artery that has been cut, put the powder on the site and tightly apply bandages and bands, and do not re-open it, and leave the stone and don't pull it out, or the patient may die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the swelling has gone down, return to your work until the stone is out.
de hernie carnouse	of flesh hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Aquous membrane is nothing else than an accumulation of moisture or white pus, which is found under the heart of the testicles, and which contains the egg; and it is called "pus", and sometimes it is properly located in the membrane of the egg, if one believes that it is another egg; and what happens is not known for certain.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this disease is due to weakness that comes from the testicles, and this matter is spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a jaundice color, or red, or black, or watery white, and this happens more; and these are the signs of recognizing this condition, for if it is in the white syphilis that we have mentioned, then the abscesses are ripe, a little long like the shape of an egg, and do not open the testicles, because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the skin itself, then the abscesses are ripe with a part of an egg, and because of this one thinks it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white syphilis, then one feels it well. Therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, test all over the scrotum, from which the shape is described earlier.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, then, which comes after the instrument, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with fire, the patient should be healed according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then he should lie on his back on something slightly raised, and have a lot of covers under him; then sit on his left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on his right, and extend the arm to one of the two ribs below the heart of the armpit; then take the spatulum, and cut the skin of the armpit between them from top to bottom, and make a straight incision through the skin of the armpit up to the white skin, and cut it carefully according to its strength; then pierce the cyst with a large needle full of water, and draw out all the water, and then place your fingers on it, and let the cyst swell upwards; and do not touch the heart of the armpit, but only the cyst; then carefully cut around the edge of the cyst, so that if you do not cut it well enough, the water will return. And if the egg has jumped out during the operation, return it to its place when you have finished operating on the cyst; then sew together the two lips of the armpit with a single stitch, and then cure it like other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the testicle corrupted by another disease, then you must tie off the vessels that are suspended, fearing a rupture of blood; then cut open the scrotum all around the suspenders, extract the testicle, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the wound is split into two parts together, know that they are two branches; then you grip the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and put on the wound soft lamb's wool in rose oil; and put on another soft lamb's wool in wine and oil, and place it over the two branches, and place doubled cloth on top, and tie it onto all the ligament which is according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two pieces of cloth, and stuff them with lamb's wool according to this form and they are sewn together at the crotch of the breeches, and one of the heads is pressed onto the buttocks up to the back, and the other on the part of the groin; and the two other heads above the two angles, and all the restraint is tied in the loop of the breeches; and sometimes this branch is medicated with cautery instead of iron, and it is that you grip the thin knife cautery, and grasp the skin of the branches, and it is scorched as we have said so that the white fluid containing the water is uncovered; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce the white fluid at the joints, and scorch it with this thin hot cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And take off the bandages in every way you can, as much as you can; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is safer; and move carefully to prevent blood from flowing, and to avoid injuries caused by surgery; and if anything contradicts what you do, whether it's an abscess, bleeding, or something else, then cure what contradicts your actions, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this treatment because of its horror, then administer puncturing as I told you, and when you are certain from the signs that we have discussed that the watery fluid has stopped flowing, then let the patient sit on a high seat; then pierce the abscess in the part below up to the whole of the spatumile, and place the puncturing deep within the body; make the holes wide so that all the fluid can flow out; then put cotton over the area, and bandage it, and leave it to drain the remaining fluid, and then treat the wound until it heals; and if the white tissue does not let the fluid flow out of the wound, then you must insert a pen or the instrument used to treat dropsy patients, of which the shape is described earlier; and widen the wound, and know that the fluid will return, and will assemble again after six months or so, and when it has assembled as before, and thus the patient will pass their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the testicle abscess
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the dissection of this vein there is fear in many dispositions, because of which I think it better to leave it; and I will tell you the work and the appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many abscesses come in the body, especially in the testes; and it is due to various causes.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to be known by an excess of bile and phlegm, which are spread to the bowels, or from a blow; and the color of the abscess follows the color of the body; and it causes no pain, and is a serious abscess; and sometimes there are gray, fearful, and bloody abscesses, with a flowing color, and occasionally they come from a blood vessel, or from inflammation of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from a blood vessel, it is known by the warm disposition of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and you must not touch it.Quant il vient de voine enflee, il est conus par la color qui est fuxee, et si ne tu i touches, ne t’en approches mie tant qu’il ne soit venuz a lor nassance.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Those who are swollen in the vein are known by their appearance and the feeling of the fingers, and anyone can well judge the size from this appearance and from other marks; and you should press the heart of the testicles, then the egg is on top, and the white membrane is drawn away from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already cooked with these new marks, then you must draw the egg and cut it; and if there is air in the membrane, or in what is inside the vessels, then you must release all that membrane and cut it roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the tumor is in the back, then you must cut it out entirely and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is finished, then dress the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then apply other remedies until it is healed.Et quant tu as curé la plaie, si covient que li patient soit a l’ombrage et au repos, et qu’il s’alimente de boire et manger legier, et qu’il ait peu de dormance, si com il oult.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the testicle abscess
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapper similar to a berry, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient grieves greatly when he moves; and the cure for this disease is also as fearful as the one before, and yet we will tell you the treatment of it according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	Let the patient sit on an elevated seat, then tie the suspensory band of testicles tightly with your fingers, covering all the vessels near the penis, and constrict them strongly; then cut through the vessels with a sharp spatula, exposing them, and then cauterize each one, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries in the temples; then insert a needle with a double thread where the vein first appeared, and tie it to the other end; then draw them gently along the middle, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisture; then treat the wound as in the others, or use bowels, so that any vessel that supplies the testicles is not cut; for this does no harm, and if a vein comes from all the vessels, then draw the testicles from all the vessels so that the ureter loses its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	from the root of the eye socket
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The causes of this hernia are either from the inguinal canal, or from the extension over the abdomen in the region of the groin, causing the intestines to descend from that opening to one of the testicles; and this opening is either in the groin, or from the extension of it, and these two types of hernias come about for many reasons: from a blow, or from jumping, or from lifting a heavy load, or from straining while defecating, and from similar activities. The sign that it is from an extension of the groin is that it develops gradually over a long time, and does not appear suddenly; and the abscesses are even all the way to the bottom, because the inguinal canal presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is a dissection of the shoulder, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses are diverse appearances under the skin near the surface, and this is due to the output of the intestine and the body being pushed by the shoulder.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the nerves go with the intestine, and are retained inside, and cause great pain for the patient, especially when they are pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cures of iron, one must fear, for which one must avoid it.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the manner of the treatment is that you instruct the patient to draw up the intestine with your hand into the wound, if he can; then hold the scrotum between your hands and lift the buttocks; then the anus is on top, and pull all the skin of the testicles down from the long side; then insert a hook into the incision in the abdomen according to what you need to open the wound, and make it such that the urethra can come out; then scrape off the inguinal hernia that is under the skin of the testicles, until the hard white hernia is exposed all over; then put your index finger into what follows the testicle, between the white hernia which is under the skin of the egg, and between the second hernia, and separate what is behind the egg, and between the second hernia; and move with your right hand into the scrotum, and hold the white hernia up to your left hand, and lift the egg all the way up to the hernia; then instruct the assistant to push the egg upward, and release what is behind the ligature; then feel with your fingers if there is any intestine wrapped around the hard white hernia, and if you find anything, pull it into the abdomen; then take a needle that has a thick thread made of 10 strands, and insert it into the back part of the hernia, which is after the skin of the testicles; then grasp the ends of the threads that appear, so that there are 4 threads; then tie them together in a cross shape, and bind the hernia that we have said is under the skin of the testicles with a strong ligature of two parts; then wrap the thread around the hernia, and tie it tightly in two places, so that none of the vessels that nourish it can enter, lest an abscess form there; then put the ligature back according to the first long ligature for two fingers of that one, and after these two ligatures leave a gap of a finger’s width in the hernia that is under the skin of the testicles; then grasp the part that is under the skin of the testicles, so that the blood vessels are cut off, as we have said before; then apply moist wool soaked in oil into the wound, and apply the ligature that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white syphilis that we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision out of fear of bloodletting.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and let the ligature remain until it cuts through; and if it is slow to fall out, then use a hot iron, and place what we have said over the area until it falls out; then heal the wound with another healing method until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of flesh hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this section, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients say that it is made like the thread which is together with the rope, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after cutting above slightly towards the bottom; then apply emollient, and heal the abscess of what is causing it, until the vessels break; and heal it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes the rupture occurs in the veins, as we have said, and the opening appears; and no intestines come out through it, and if they do, it is very little, and one should repair it every hour; and even if he remains too long in this state, he believes that the wound or the hernia will increase in size, because of the extension of the hernia which is in the veins, as we have said, for it is extended, then becomes soft and swollen, and the opening appears; and its cure is by cautery, as we have previously said; and sometimes it is cured by iron in this way: and one should let the patient lie on his back between your hands, then apply the large salt according to the amount of three times, and then extract the hernia which is under the skin that the sweat comes from, then take the thread and place it over the visible spot of the hernia; and press it against the lower abdomen, then cut the two visible spots of the hernia on the top of the thread, and cut one and the other; then pull out the top of the thread, and do not cover the hernia or stretch anything, as I have made you aware in the cure of the rupture of the intestines; then heal it with the healing of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, clean and treat the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The ulcer is constrained and has no appearance in the roux, and cautery is more beneficial in this case and closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	softening of the skin of the testicles
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the testicles becomes soft in some men due to the organs within becoming softened, and it is milky white in appearance; and when one wishes to treat this, he must make the patient lie on his back, and cut the softened skin above the natural membrane; then bring together the two edges of the wound at a single stitch, or at three or four stitches tightly; then cut between the stitches, and treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed, then remove the sutures.
dou chastrement	of chastisement
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	You should know that castration is prohibited in our law, and for this reason I would prefer not to discuss it in this book. It is only necessary in two ways: the first is so that the vets can answer questions and know how to treat injuries; the second is because we often need to castrate certain animals to help us, such as bulls, rams, horses, and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that castration is done in two ways: by tying, or by slitting.Si tu veis chastrer bouc, et mouton, et chevaus, et bestes autres, il covient que li testicules soit atraites et alons.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In that which we do by attraction, let us sit the beast in warm water until their joints are softened and relaxed; then pull with your hand until they are reset and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Of the castration of the testicles: you should dye the beast and press the skin of the testicles in your left hand, then tie the scrotum, and stroke each testicle a hundred times when you have thoroughly scratched them; and leave some poultice of saffron and the fine saffron which is on the vessels; and this kind of castration is better than that which is done by attraction, because with atraction something of the testicles may remain, causing the beast to desire lust; then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Of Hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphroditism is of two kinds in men: one is that between the testicles appears also as the shape of a woman's nature, having hair, and sometimes it urinates from it; the other kind, which is rarer, is where the man has both male and female sexual organs.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other method is for women; it has a handle like a rod and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for men and women is that you cut off the scrotum, and treat it like any other wound; in the second method, for men whose urine exits through the skin of the testicles, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	of the testicles
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	A hernia is a swelling in the groin, as large and ugly-looking as a hand; some women have them as large as a hand, and that is the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	You should dye the excess of the hernia with your hand or fingernails, and cut it gently; and do not go too deep, lest bleeding ensues, then treat it with another treatment until it heals; and for another swelling that arises at the mouth of the vagina, use it, and perhaps it will burst, and is like a cow's udder, and so they call it in Old French "maladie kowee".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you must treat it, as we have said regarding the tenting, and heal it until it is cured.
de erratique	of the erratics
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	It is errant when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the opening is small; and it is natural from birth, or accidental due to illness that comes to it; or it is caused by a wound, or a subtle or thick cyst, and is formed deeply in the body, or on the sides, or underneath, or wherever; and they should understand conception and childbirth, and perhaps flowers to have; and the knowledge of this is through the observation of the midwife.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the stumps are visibly close by, then cut them with your fingers or with a knife.Si li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a subtle cyst and it is close to the lips, then cut them thus: place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then form the lips, so that the subtle cyst is cut through, and cover the stumps with the cyst; then take wool, moisten it in oil, and place it over the wound, and let the woman rest at home for several days so that it may not close up.Si li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the syphilitic sore is hard and thick, then you should cut it with a spatula similar to a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the swelling is of fresh flesh, then cut it and scrape it; and have blood-staunching medicines, such as aconite, dragon's blood, incense, and egg white; then apply a large piece of wool, so that the wound does not close; and so for a long time, and then apply a tent of dry linen; then treat with other treatments until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when there is fresh flesh in the ulcer, it should be cut in this way, unless it is a deep abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For one must not touch an abscess that is deep in the ulcer.Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins from which blood flows without control, and when hemorrhoids are old, they become throbbin; and we have already described their appearances, signs, and I will now describe those that can be cured.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and throbbin, when they are deeply embedded in the rectum, and do not appear to the touch, are not cured by a cautery with iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the mouth of the rectum, which one can feel, are those that can be cured.Si on appert li thelul et les emorroides par grant dolur, si convient que l’on le cuie par fer; car la piere n’est mie trove a la guaine, ains est trove en la chair, ou il avient grant dolor, et s’eleve li sang.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is necessary, therefore, to place the woman in a cold room, then heat the tongs and the comb at its roots, and then powder with medicines that constrict blood, such as aconite and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then bandage her feet to the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if bleeding occurs, have her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and gallnuts and similar things, and then take barley flour, and cook it with honey and garlic, and make a plaster of it on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	And if not, have her breathe in bellows on the back and on the breasts without bleeding; then take wool, and moisten it in plantain juice or in dogwood juice with old wine, and have it breathed in at the affected spot.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has settled, treat it with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles rough ash, so it should be covered as I have said [before]; and then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses in the rectum
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses come about in the body, such as ulcers and pus-filled sores, and herpes, and boils, and fistulas, and hemorrhoids, and hot abscesses, and various other ailments which I have detailed in the classification.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore, I should explain in this treatise about the hot abscess that arises in the body, which is not among the abscesses that are found in the bowels; and if you wish to know its treatment, observe whether the abscess is sharp at the beginning of its appearance, and filled with heat and fever, and turns red when you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Then do not hurry to pierce, but let the pain subside; and then have the patient sit on a chair, with two small seats for him to lean on, and support his back and raise his feet to the sides, apart from the leg; and let his thighs be spread, and place his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good ligature; then suck the wound towards the right side, and administer the instrument used to open the wound, from which the form comes afterwards; you must insert the rod first to know the depth of the wound, so that what enters with the instrument does not go in deeper than it should, and does not hurt the patient; if the instrument is larger, cover the depth of the wound with cloth so that the instrument does not cause discomfort; and let him hold the spout of the instrument upwards, and suck.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess opens, and one makes it on the soft hand, then it should be covered with a bandage, or with a sponge moistened in rose oil; and when the bowels are emptied, then you should put into the wound tents moistened in oil of red roses, or in dry green oil; and place the tent beyond the wound at the bottom of the injury, and place a poultice over the injury and over the little finger, with a clean sponge moistened in water or malvas flowers that have been cooked; then cure it after two days of ointment application, until it is healed; and sometimes raise the injury and the wound by an enema of water and honey, and then with water or roots of lilies and aristolochia that have been cooked for a long time; then return to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is sunken in the injury, then you should beware of cooking with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	It is important for the midwife to recognize the natural signs of childbirth and the associated symptoms. When you see a woman struggling to push her baby down, and she craves the scent of rose, then the baby is eager to be born. This indicates that the childbirth follows its natural course, with the baby's head emerging first, followed by the afterbirth; and when you see these signs, gently press her belly to speed up the process and ensure a swift delivery. For when the baby descends, the afterbirth follows suit, and the mother's body is cleansed of any excess fluids through proper purification rituals. Any other method of childbirth is not considered natural.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	Because sometimes the baby may emerge feet first, or it may come out of the chest, hands, or abdomen; and in some cases, it may get stuck in the neck or other areas, leading to dangerous complications. Thus, a midwife must be wise and skilled in these matters, guarding against mistakes and disappointments. I will now describe all the various scenarios and how to assist in each case.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child is born naturally upon its head, and the woman gives birth with great difficulty and her strength wanes, then make her sit upon a stool or have women support her; and heat some olive oil or fried fenugreek, and then pour it between the midwife's fingers into the small opening of which there is now the shape:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And split the afterbirth, and press on its nail until the moisture that is within flows out; and squeeze the womb of the woman so that the child descends, and if it does not descend, then the woman should be enema with a mixture of fenugreek with oil of sweet fennel; then make her press and sneeze from pungent substances, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: then the child will come out now.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if both hands come out, then you should gently reset them little by little; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on the seat, and lift her feet upward; then stand the seat upon the ground, and support the woman so that she does not strain while standing; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child is dead, then press the hands with the nail which is described above, and extract the child, and reset in the same way.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the child's issue upon its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes out onto its feet, it should be pushed upwards; then rock it back and forth gently until it is calm; then hold one foot and stretch it gently.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it leaps just to the knees, instruct it to grab hold, and cause it to sneeze with your breath; if it leaps out, so be it by God's will.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if he cannot jump as we have said, then turn him little by little until he is in his natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then he is easily cured.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come out as we have said, take myrrh and oil of sixment and gum dissolved, and grind everything in the mortar; and apply this ointment to the woman's womb, then let her sit in warm water up to her ribs; and when she is soft below, make her a collar of myrrh and put it on her, and leave it for an hour; then let her sit on a chair, then cause her to sneeze and squeeze her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child will come out now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	for the child to come out over his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, then the midwife puts her hands on it little by little; then she lies on her back, and the child hangs down below her feet, and she lies on her side in bed; and she bends her hands little by little, and then presses her hands on her belly, and pulls up the cushions from underneath, until the child is turned downward; and if the child does not cry out, then take its feet and move it about, then move its belly upward, then put your hands in; and rock the child little by little; and command the woman to hold on until the child emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the issue of the child which comes out width a hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I want to engineer the return of the hand: if it cannot be returned, then make the woman get up and walk; if she cannot walk, then make her sit on the bed, and raise her legs straight up; then administer the mustard poultice that I have described; and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a chair, then study how to return the hand; and rock the child according to its natural shape, and make her sneeze, and command her to hold on until the child emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the child's exit at its neck, and spread his hands, and turned his face towards his mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I want the patient to dye their hand, then turn it little by little and gently wiggle their fingers; and when they are even, put on a poultice of honey and oil, as we have said, then instruct them to move their fingers little by little; and when you have done this, make her sit on a chair, and instruct her to grip something; and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same way with all the afterbirth
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes out in this way all over the body, then scrape off the scabs at your fingernails, so that the moisture is drained; and if the baby can put its face and neck through her breasts, so that they are not restricted, and the baby dies, then bottle-feed the child, as you have placed it, and instruct the woman to grip something a few times; then release her gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the exit of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens rarely.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	They are strange things, and do not live, unless by name; I know that they are multiplied, and are separated by the caustic which divides them, which is bound to the bud; and sometimes they emerge as naturally as a tooth, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they emerge painfully, then the treatment as we have said, and let the surgeon be skillful, and quickly and lightly do what he does; and act thus as is best for salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the sea one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and are all shaped like a child according to the measurement of the glorious Sage, and it behooves the surgeon to know all this, for perhaps similar things may happen to him; so act according as is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat a woman after childbirth, as I have said in the previous section, and there is no progress, forcing you to use manual pressure, then you should check if the woman is of sound health and has no fear of death. Then, the woman should be laid on her back with her head tilted down and her legs raised. The midwife should apply a poultice made from equal parts of altheae, fenugreek, and flaxseed to the mouth of the womb, then grease the midwife's hands with these oils and poultices, and gently insert them into the woman. She should be cautious if the child is about to descend onto its head; insert the fingers into her vagina or anus or in her throat or under her tongue or below her beard or in her armpit or near her ribs. If the child is descending feet first, insert the fingers into the perineum and press gently on the sides of the pelvis. The midwife should hold the poultice in her right hand and place the bandage between her left thumb and forefinger, then gently apply it to the entire hand and insert the poultice into one of the places mentioned above until it reaches the empty space. This is how the poultice should be applied:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	then file against the other nail, or the third if you need it, so that the extraction is even; and then press them evenly by moving from side to side, for movement to exit, and let the nails bite to hold the movement, as is the form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part remains, then anoint the nail with some of its oil, and push it into that part, and pull the other part; and if nothing remains, then put this nail or a higher one, and do this until it comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot pull back due to the tightness, then you must wrap it with a cloth, as much as possible; then press on the fold at the plant or the ankle, and so you must do in the other hand, and in the feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the child's head is large and it is constricted in its passage, or if there is a great accumulation of fluid at the top, you should insert the spathumile between your fingers, puncture the head, and drain off the fluid; or use the instrument called "almidach", with which the shape of the instrument that comes next in this chapter is made. And in the same way, if the child has a large natural head, draw out the bones with tongs, and if the head is forced out and strained by force, it will be split open so that the moisture that is at the bottom of the passage can escape; and if it cannot come out, cut it into pieces as far as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, pierce it so that the moisture flows out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the swelling is on their feet, the pull is light, and the movement towards the mouth of the wound is easy.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	If it is caught in the belly or the foot, you should pull it out with a cloth wrapped around the hand; and cut into the belly or the foot until the moisture that is inside flows out; and if other members are stuck, and the bowels remain, he puts his hand into the depth of the wound and pulls it up to the mouth of the wound; then he pushes in one or two fingers, and pulls it out; and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has formed there, one should not work on it, but rather apply moist and fatty substances; and he applies poultices, and uses warm and softening water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the fetus is on his side, and you can make it even, then administer what we have said about a live child; but if one does not have the strength to do that, then pull it out in pieces, and leave nothing of the afterbirth behind.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if it is administered to those who have said that abscesses come in the sea; and if bloodletting occurs, let it be stopped with astringents, and other remedies are administered.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly a child had died, then another was sewn over it, and the other died too.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time she got an abscess in her armpit, which swelled so much that it opened and began to ooze profusely.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the wound, and I thought for a long time, but could not heal it.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong attracting plaster, and one bone came out, and after a few days, some others.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very amazed, because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I probed the wound, and put my hands inside it until the woman was in a better state; and she lived for a long time afterwards, although sometimes a little urine would leak out; and I have only mentioned this chapter because when a teacher discovers something strange, he should know how to provide relief.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	how to return the dislocated joint to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Hereafter comes the form of the press, with which one cuts into the books; and in .2 turns at .2 ears of .2 lines.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Nevertheless, the horn should be more subtle than the restrictor and should be made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the tube should be half a finger wide, and the edges of the trees should be sharpened, and between the two edges there should be two stops of the same wood, which are fixed in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more; and these two stops are inserted into the mouth of the sea to open when you turn the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, with a more subtle and lighter appearance, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the resemblance of tongs; and has at its two ends two adjustments, as you see, of a palm in length, and two digits in width; and when you see to open the wound to all the instrument, then let the woman lie on the bed, her feet hanging and her legs spread, then fit the two adjustments together in the wound, and hold the head of the instrument underneath between her thighs; then work your hand throughout the instrument, as you have done with tongs similarly, according to the quantity that you see to open the mouth of the wound, until the midwife does what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all decorated, and their appearances are multiplied; and when the patient sees them prepared, his fear is increased, and he is more reluctant to undergo the procedure because of their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despair about the instrument until you have prepared it, for their necessity is unavoidable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the afterbirth is retained in childbirth, you should instruct the patient to hold in her breath, and then make her sneeze with an emetic, and pinch her hands and nose; and if she passes gas through these means, that is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, he takes the pot and makes an opening in the lid, and puts herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, such as calendula, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in water over fire; then put a stick into the opening in the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the wound, and hold it so that the vapors enter the wound; then make her sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	Then let the secondine dry quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if she remains after this treatment and does not urinate, command the midwife to moisten her left hand with oil of sesamum or with a poultice of elderberries, and then insert it into her naturally, and find the second membrane; and when she has found it, grasp it and extend it little by little straight, so that the wound is not stretched during extraction; but she must move it slightly to the right and left, and then pull; it will come out.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	If the mouth of the wound is constricted, we have described the treatment of sneezing and fumigation with herbs; if it does not open with all that we have said, then beware of bleeding; but what is at the mouth of the wound, you should tie it to the thigh of the woman, then cleanse it with a four-drug ointment; then she will pass wind and recover, but still, when she passes wind, an evil odor comes to the stomach and head, and the patient suffers.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	So then one should use appropriate fume: some of the ancients have tried smoke from watercress and dry figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument used to smoke out the woman for the retention of flowers and afterbirth is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	It is made of glass like a cane, and the narrow end is placed in the wound, and the wide end above the coals; and the fumigation is over the charcoal, and the wound until it is healed, and then another one is started.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born without a perforated anus; instead, they have a small, narrow opening: therefore, the midwife should pierce this with her finger, and not with a sharp instrument, and keep the bandage from touching it; then she should put on warm milk mixed with wine and oil, and then treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that he will be cured, then put a plug of wool in the wound, and leave it for several days, and remove it when the child wants to go to bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes a sudden stop to the bleeding occurs in a wound or an abscess; then it must be stopped suddenly: then it should be dressed as we have said with a plug of wool.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the fistula of the fundament
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from under the anus are nodules, and they grow larger than those that come from inside the anus, or in the space between its two parts, whether there is one fistula or multiple. And when this nodule becomes old, it opens up, and usually white pus or thin fluid emerges, and sometimes these fistulas become infected. They are recognized by the fact that the patient either expels them through defecation or they come out as wind, and sometimes they may burst out on their own.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And there are fistulas that pierce all the way to the bladder, and halfway down the shaft of the penis; and they reach up to the hip joint, and to the scrotum.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one recognizes a persistent fistula in the anus that does not drain: and it is necessary to press your index finger into the anus, and insert a thin needle made of bronze or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is twisting, one must insert a thin tent made of lead or horse hair into the fistula as far as you can feel it with your finger; and if you do not feel it, and no pus or wind emerges as we have said, then know that it has not broken through; so be quick about treating it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula has reached the bladder or the urethra, then the urine flows out, and medicine cannot stop it.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced to the joint of the thigh, then the vein flows to the site; if there is twisting and the pain extends around, then it will settle down there, and ointments are of no use, neither suddenly nor over time; and in these persisting fistulas, there is no cure beyond hard work, and foolishness is the reward of those who meddle.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In one that is not persisting and not old, there is hope of recovery by iron, as I have experienced, and the patient lies on his back; and you raise his legs up to his thighs, and he bends his thighs towards his belly; then you pierce a tent made of bronze or lead, if there is twisting, as far as you can tell where the vein flows.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it around his anus, then you must pierce with your index finger if the vein has not yet been pierced; and if it is uncovered where you feel between your finger and the flesh, then you know that it is persisting; so do not work on one who cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One can still heal them, although it is rare; and the aid that one provides is to scorch with a fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before; and pour everything hot into the fistula, as far as the fundament; and do this two or three times, until you know that those diseased tissues have been burned away, which are like a feather; and then cure with moist bandages with tallow, until those tissues come out; and then cure with ointment, closing up the wound.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus healed, that is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it cannot be healed otherwise; and if pus enters between, and does not pierce all the way to the rectum which is at the fundament, and there is a thick covering of diseased tissue between your finger and the bandage, and you see the fistula continues below this covering towards the anus; then cut away the beginning of the fistula, and pour in hot water before the bandage, and then cauterize afterwards, as far as the top of the bandage; and the bandage will be delivered, and fall out; then scrape away those diseased tissues that look like a feather, and nothing will remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the pus runs out, and goes between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or with medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Because fire cautery brings together two things: the burning of the joined flesh and the stanching of blood and the drying of moisture; then the treatment of tents with butter or ground substance until the bowels gush forth and the burnt flesh issues from the bowels; then treat the wound with sudatory poultices made of hard charcoal, and these are dry remedies.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes from the depth of the foundation, and is separated from the body, put your finger into it, and explore it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you sense the tent, and within it are threads or flesh, or it is close to piercing, then there is no other way but to seek salvation and hope through one of three methods: either cauterize as we have said, or cut to the bottom, or if you can, insert tents and treat as before; and do not go too deep, lest you cut into the lining that holds the foundation, and let the evacuations issue forth through the orifices as they may; then treat as we have said; perhaps it will be healed. Or remove that covering and cleanse after it has been cut from the foundation, either by tent or other pointed instrument; then medicate that infected flesh in the wound, as you can; then strive to heal the wound and prevent the fistula from spreading beyond the foundation: thus the patient will suffer less.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes they are fistulas according to this way: and it is when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is on the side next to the foundation underneath the skin above, then take a tent pierced at the top according to this shape:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And he inserts a twisted thread into it, and inserts the tent along the entire thread into the fistula as far as the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is piercing in the margin of the foundation inside, then pull out the thread from that hole, so that you put your finger on the foundation; and pull the head of the thread, and bring the two heads together, and tighten them against each other, and leave it for one or two days; and sometimes they are tightened, until the threads scrape those cells that are between two, and dry up; then cure the wound until it is souded and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not drain, then have it drained in every way you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not appropriate to cover with a bandage immediately after lancing, and then treat the wound, as we have said, until it has healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spathumile spiny, from which one makes the fistula, is very sharp on one side and smooth on the other; and not sharp where it should not be, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two types: they can be inside the anus, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and some discharge blood, and there may be one or several of them, and they protrude from the anus and from the top of the anus; but those that protrude have little moisture, and sometimes a little yellow water or blood, and they take on the color of the body. The treatment for those who have them inside is to make the patient strain to move his bowels until the hemorrhoids appear, and then you can see the veins; then you must hurry and grasp them with tweezers, or hold them with your fingernail, then cut them at their roots; and if the nails cannot hold them because of moisture, they are grasped with a piece of cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chamois; then they are pulled out with the fingers, then cut, and powder some hot powdered cautery on top of them; or you can cauterize them as described in the chapter on cautery, then treat other hemorrhoids until he is cured; and if the anus cannot be cleared, cleanse the patient with a sharp and harsh enema to wash away what is inside the anus so that it can come out easily; when the patient strains and the veins are pushed out of the anus, the treatment is simple; then you grasp them with your fingernail or tweezers, cut them, and then treat them as we have said until he is cured and fears incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	You should perform the stitching in this manner: take a twisted thread and put it through a needle; then pull the thread from above and push the needle through from the other side, bringing the two ends of the thread together beneath the needle, leaving some slack; tighten the thread firmly, tie off the thread, remove the needle, and do the same with all the others, leaving one to stop any bleeding; then place a damp cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate over the wound, and command the patient to rest; leave it until the stitches fall out, and then treat the wound with ointment and other remedies until it is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	from dryness of the anus or rectum
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is dryness of the bowels within the intestines, caused by natural constriction, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	You should cut away at the tip of a wart or thorn with a spatula or your fingernail, removing the outer layer so that it does not become moist; then treat it until it scabs over as it should; and if it cannot scab over, repeat the scraping more aggressively than before, until it heals well and is fully removed; then treat it until it is completely healed.
dou fremit	when it trembles
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Ants are a small appearance formed under the body, and they go very deeply; and sometimes the ant stings them, and they feel it as if dead from trembling, and it comes all over the body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the treatment is that you take a needle from an goose feather, or a strong vulture feather, and place this needle on the trembling, until the purple circle around the trembling; then turn your hand all around the needle so that you grab all around the trembling, and drive it deeply, and pull out the trembling by its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see fit to make a candle of bronze or iron according to this shape, let it be thin beneath and drawn out on top.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not pierce it, so that the candle can be held in the hand and pressed against the shin. And if you see fit, cauterize the shins as described in the chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes an enema is made of silver or brass, or of melted or hammered copper; and sometimes they are made of small and large instruments, depending on those to whom they are administered.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those who are administered for the treatment of children, and who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the small and large enema is above wide, or the belly is bound according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And it has a decrease where the bellies are tied, as you see, and the intestines are pierced inside; and it has two openings on one side, and one on the other; and the belly is where one puts the medicine of a beast's bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small openings, and there is an inch of space between each opening, then tie into these openings a strong thread of twisted thread in the shape of X or around, and assemble the belly so that it is like a goat; and when the medicine is inside, then tie it to the instrument in front with a strong string, then cleanse; and this is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	Let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head with oil or egg white or a similar substance, then plug it up lightly; then the minister should squeeze his fingers together until he is all wet, then remove the plug, and let the patient lie with his legs exposed to the air, and if the medicine wants to come out, let him hold it as long as he can; and if he sleeps for a night afterward, it will be even better.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you treat him with a syringe for dysentery, and the medicine rushes out quickly, then repeat it until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are at the anus or an abscess, let the catheter be as thin as for a child; and the shape of the thin catheter that presses on the skin is:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already discussed in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will discuss manual and medicinal treatments according to their properties.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and according to what makes them.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by a blow of stone or sword and knife, or lance or staff or arrow, or similar objects; or they are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or head, or foot, or belly, or liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds of the head, for the memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, one should take care if it is due to a blow from a stone or similar object, and the skin is still intact and the wound is large, and you quickly doubt a hot abscess: then have him bleed with the cephalic vein itself if there is little blood coming from the wound, and let the bleeding be in the opposite direction of the injured part; and let the patient avoid fullness from wine and rich foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to bleed, then let him lessen his food intake and neither drink wine nor eat meat; and put cotton soaked in rose oil only, or in astringent wine, on the wound if hot abscesses come from it; and if there is no hot abscess, then put powder on the wound when it has all its blood and has not been moved by the air, which I will speak about a little later; and if the burn has been moved by the air, then put some ointments on it until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, such as from a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together with stitches, then bring them together with sutures, as I will describe for wounds of the abdomen, of the chest.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to the bone, and it can be reached with a finger, but only just, then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as testicles and cooked wheat, as well as meat, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find a boil on the skin, and it is not near the bone, then lance it and let out the pus; then treat it with medicine. And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which pulsates, and it cannot be staunched by medicine, then tie it off with a thread; and if that does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is easy; you should apply this powder which causes sores to heal as soon as the fire has burned them.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is as follows: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; quicklime three parts, and the powder finely, and apply it to the wound, and bind it tightly, until it is firmly attached to all its blood; and then tie it well, and leave it without loosening, if it does not swell; for the medicine is not removed until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one makes it only with chalk, when one doesn't have incense or dragon's blood, but so long as the wound is moved by fire.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound has been moved by fire, it should be left as it is without applying any of this powder; instead, put on some digestive ointments or a poultice made from barley flour mixed with water and honey until it becomes soft; then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if there is a fracture with the wound, and it is small, then I will extract it with subtle tweezers; and I will tell you later about fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	wounds to the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is a nerve, there should be no other treatment than leaving the wound uncovered and not applying anything constricting, because it harms the nerves and makes them retract; and nothing cold should be applied to the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member; but the medicine should be warm, like hot water washed in warm water, and mixed with rose oil, and cooked washed also in warm water, and other stones of this kind, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then cut and ligate the vessels, then treat it until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is deep and it is bleeding and full of pus, then pierce it or a lower spot; and if the artery is cut and bleeding ensues, then ligature it, and cauterize if necessary; and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the windpipe, and the passage for food is blocked, then cut along the windpipe on the throat's collarbone, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then ligature it properly, and leave it for a few days, then cleanse with cleansing ointments until it heals; and if the wound has left an impression in the bone, then pierce it; and if there are bone fragments, then draw them all out if you can, and those that you cannot reach, leave them be until the wound heals, and clean the wound and ligature the exit; and if the wound is fresh, then apply powder over the powder as I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have described in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of a wound from a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a strike from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then examine whether the wound breathes winds from the injury: thus you know that the wound is deadly; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, then do not put the powder to it in the first hour, nor bind it for the blood that seeps out, pierces through, returns to the body, and heals the patient; but apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day; and if you have no ointment, then place old cotton in the wound to suck out moisture, and let the patient sleep on the wound for three, four, or more days; then no spasms, tremors of the body, or pains in the limbs will come; and when you see good signs, then you know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat it therefore with poultices and other remedies until it is healed; and if it will not heal, and the wound remains open, then know that there is a fistula; treat it as it should be treated.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, in the face or back, then treat it as we have said before; if it is large, close it with stitches; and if it is small, treat it with powder; and if it has pierced deep into the bone, and pieces of it are visible, then clean the wound and pull out any foreign bodies; and if they are not visible, let the wound fester to draw out any foreign objects; and for other wounds in other parts of the body, judge as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	from rupturing of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	There are great, medium and small ruptures of the belly; from the large wound sometimes the intestines or nerves of the intestines protrude, causing pain when they are touched; and stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one, because one must stitch up the intestines little by little, warming them gradually as they are stitched; for the intestines swell as soon as they feel cold, so they must be stitched up little by little, and it is better to treat a smaller wound in this way, as one can stitch up the intestine gradually back into place rather than all at once. And know that there are four types of ruptures of the belly: the two common types occur with stitching of the belly, and with stitching of other wounds on the body; and the two other types are specific to the belly, and I will describe each one and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and something from the intestines has come out, and it is difficult to put back in, it is by one of two ways: either because of the size of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to coldness.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this way: moisten a sponge or soft cloth in lukewarm water only, or cook in squint water and cypress and spikenard, and warm the intestines until the swelling is removed; and sometimes this wine constrictor helps, and it is better to use it solely for deflation.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling go down, then moisten the intestines with water or altee and mallows that have been cooked, for through this the entrance is restricted by a little; and if it cannot enter, then make a small cut in the wound with an instrument that is used to scrape out hemorrhoids; and the first treatment is better than cutting, which one should not do without great necessity; and the instrument for splitting is: insert it into the curve and push out, and see the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, then put them back according to their natural shape in their proper place, if you can, because this is worth it.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is low in the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on his back and elevate his legs above his head; and if it's high in the abdomen, he should be positioned so that his head and feet are higher than his torso, and if the rupture is on one side of the abdomen, then the affected part should be elevated higher than the other. This advice holds true for both large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, use what is readily available to you; then, hold in your hand an instrument that covers the entire wound, and bring the edges together; this is the common method of suturing. Take a needle or several needles according to the size of the wound, leaving two fingers' width from the top of the wound, and thread a strong needle with one or two strands through both edges of the skin and the subcutaneous tissue beneath; then, tie off the thread around the needle so that it pulls the edges together. Repeat this process as needed according to how many needles you require, until the entire wound is closed. The needles should be medium-sized, not too thin or too thick; thin needles can pierce through the flesh and skin, while thick ones may not be able to enter at all. Tie off the threads around the needles so that they don't cut into the patient's skin when they sleep, and place tents or pieces of cloth over the needle heads to keep them in place. Leave the sutures until the wound has healed. This method of suturing with needles is most suitable for small wounds. I once sewed up a man who had been stabbed in the abdomen; the wound was more than a palm wide, and his intestines protruded out by two palms; I closed the wound while it was still inside the abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought him back the intestine, which had been outside for 24 hours; I sewed up the wound and it healed in 15 days.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And they had judged him to be dead, and it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where there was no medicine or ointment available; and I placed old cotton over the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you about two proper methods of suturing: take the needle and insert it from the outside into the inside of the body; when it has pierced through to the other side, hold the needle in place with your thumb or finger on the spot where you inserted the needle, and then bring the needle out through another spot on the inside and draw it back out to the outside. The principle behind this type of suturing is that you sew just like a leatherworker sews leather, going back and forth between the two sides of the wound until the suturing is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of suturing, which Galen describes correctly, is as follows: bring the two parts together naturally and apply one end of a silk thread to the other, in such a way that you pierce one side only, and leave the two ends of the wound; then return the needle and pierce through from the outside part into the inside, through both ends of the wound; then pierce through both ends from the outside part into the inside, through two other ends of the silk thread on the opposite side; this is the best and most common method of suturing.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen says this, and some testify to it: one should sew the abdomen with two needles, each with a thread through it; then one should push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew up wounds; and know that when the wound is in the middle of the abdomen, the suturing is more difficult than in other places in the abdomen.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgments of the wound are as for other wounds: and it is that when you find the fresh wound full of blood, so that the fire has moved it, then put back the intestines, and close the wound; then put on the powder of the healing charcoal, and if the fire has moved it, then apply some ointment that is present, until the wound heals; then tie the threads, and sew the sutures, and the mirach; then treat the wound as for the others, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicine, then put on old cotton, as soon as it begins to heal, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you do not need any other medicine in various dispositions where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound will affect the principal members, then moisten a light woolen cloth in tempered warm oil, or in rose oil, and place it around the angers, and under the armpits; and if there is pain or swelling in the bowels, and it happens many times, then enema with tepid black wine, and especially if the swelling comes to the intestines; and pierce it from within, and know that when it is the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines which are called "young" cannot heal when they are damaged, and this is due to the thinness of their walls, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of their nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the thread jumps out of the wound, put it back as it was while it is fresh; and if it is old and has become green or black, you should tie up the area which is black so that no more bleeding occurs, for there are veins and arteries there; then cut away what is between the stitch, and let the two ends hang loose below the wound until it is time to extract them when the wound has healed.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rot of boiling water
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestines are severed and the wound is small, one can sometimes heal it in this way: I saw a man who was pierced by a lance in his abdomen; the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became a fistula, from which he passed stools and gases; I treated him according to my ability and continued to suturing until it healed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him sewing up, I doubted that the patient had harm in his belly; and he had no harm, but remained in better condition, eating and drinking; and some experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in such a way: take a needle with a large eye, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the needle has passed through, put it over both lips so that it presses his mouth closed; and then tie off the thread, and it will remain so that he cannot untie it, then put another needle after in the same way as before, until the wound is completely sewn up; and then cut the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If these wounds are in the intestine and no harm comes to the patient, and one can sew up the intestine with a slender thread cut from an animal's intestine, in such a way: take the end of this intestinal thread which is well charred, and then tie to the end of this thread a slender linen thread wound around it, then put the thread through the needle, and sew up the intestine and tie off the thread; and this manner of sewing with a needle is not certain except according to hope and expectation; and if the wound is large and broad, especially when it is in one of the intestines, there is no healing unless with great skill.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula, wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it wakes up, is universally called a "fistula", and especially when it is swollen and becomes bow-shaped.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is according to the verdant nodule, made hard and white, where there is no pain, and is just as bowed as the feather of a bird; and sometimes it is clear and bowed, and sometimes thick; sometimes small, and sometimes large enough; and I have already spoken about these causes in the division of wounds: that any wound which is not healed, and there is no pus, is due to one of nine causes: namely, because of the smallness of blood or body; or because of its wickedness; or because there is hard matter within it, and on the lips, which does not allow pus to form; or there is too much inflammation; or the site is poor, and the matter is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good for treatment; or because the corruption is of a pestilential nature; or because the region's property is late in digestion, slow in healing, and swollen by nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, their signs, and medical treatments in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now I should let you know about the treatment of fistula which is done by handiwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and from arteries, and from nerves, or from the sinus, or from the intestines, or from the bladder, or from any of the ribs, or from the spine of the back, or from any joint of the hands or feet; and also where they occur in the principal part of a limb, and in similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are in this way are of grief sanation, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place that I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you see it being understood, then take a tent of bronze or iron, if the fistula is straight, so that it may be quiered; and if the fistula is crooked, then search it with a fine tent of lead, for the lead bends around the tortuositeit; and if the fistula has many openings, and you cannot properly search it by tents, then cleanse it through one of the openings with a clyster, for moisture goes from one opening to another, and cleanses it; then quier it bloody to your ability so that you know if there is bone or nerve, and is chewed em by depth, and ask the patient about the pain they feel when you press with your hand, and where they feel it most; and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places I have mentioned to you, then treat it according to what I have told you, and remove the putrefied matter and rotten flesh that are within; and then cure it until it is healed; and if the fistula is very deep from a straight place, then you must cope it deeply as much as you can, then put moist tents in medicine ague, and fill them up to the head of the fistula so that the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom; and then put ointments on it until it is healed, and if it is not healed by this method, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cope it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerve in the limbs causes you grief, as we have said, and if the bone is exposed and there is decay and darkness, then treat it with cautery until the decay is completely removed, then cure the wound with healing ointments until it is healed; and if it is not healed, and becomes swollen again as before, know that you have not gone deep enough: then open and probe until you reach the bottom, and remove all the decay, then restore the bone; and if it is thus healed, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the decay is too deep for you to reach; then let nature take its course, and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can pull it out with tweezers, or with an instrument suitable for this purpose, and if there are many bones, pull them all out, one by one; and if moisture causes a contrary effect, without error or fear, then dry and cauterize, and apply ointments to heal the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in one hour, then place something on the wound to encourage pus formation, and let it remain until the pus has formed around the bone, and then the bones will come out more easily; and if it is a large bone, such as the leg or thigh, then cut away only the腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉腐肉
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	He was a young man of about thirty who had a pain in his leg from an internal cause, so that the matter came to the leg and it swelled with a large abscess, and there was no reason to open it; but they looked at it because of their folly and worked on it until the abscess opened and a lot of matter flowed out, and it became a fistula, and many holes appeared in it through which the fluid from the body flowed; and many doctors treated him for two years, and there was no one with wisdom in the art of medicine, so I was called to see him, and I saw his leg and the remedies they used to treat him, and what was flowing out of the holes into a large container; and the skin of the young man turned red and had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I placed a tent over one of the holes and then examined all the openings, finding that they connected with each other throughout the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hastened, therefore, and probed one of the openings until I exposed a portion of the bone, which I found to be corrupted and perforated, and the corruption extended to the bone within; I probed what appeared to me to be the corruption, and believed that there was no other corruption except that which I removed; and then I began to heal the wound with strong medicines for a long time, but it would not heal; and then I probed again, and exposed the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, which I probed and then removed, and labored to heal the spot; but I could not, though I probed around a palm's breadth of the bone, and cut away all its soft parts, then healed it with medicines; and it was cured and healed rapidly, and there was no need to probe the wound again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure it, and because of the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For often because of the bloodletting he bled a lot, but he was completely healed and in the place of the bone a hard lump formed, and he had a good disposition and did not suffer any harm or ill effects in every way, neither when walking nor when standing.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken anywhere in the body, one should treat it in this way: take a thread and tie it to the top of the exposed bone, and instruct someone to pull it upwards; and take another larger piece of linen and tie it over the lump on the bone, and tie it at the top so that you draw the rotten flesh underneath towards the bottom, and uncover the flesh above where you see the need for treatment, so that the thread does not cut into the flesh; and place a hot iron or a wooden block underneath the bone to press down on the rotten flesh; and one should keep doing this as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and do it again later.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is broken and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then uncover all the flesh; then place a firebrand underneath, and then cut away the corruption from one part to another, and cut away the healthy tissue around the site of the corruption as we have said; and if the corruption is at the joint, then cut into the corrupted joint and cut the bone where it contains on the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, there is no need to cut except at the joint; and if the corruption is at the wrist of the hand, or at the wrist of the foot, then this thing is very strong, but nevertheless you must inquire into this corruption, how it appears to you; and cleanse it in every way that you can, but be careful not to damage the vein or nerve; and know that there are many types of cutting instruments for treating broken bones, depending on the structure of the bone, its appearance, thickness, thinness, length, and hardness; therefore, one must prepare a tool for each type of treatment. You will learn which tool you need according to your knowledge of this art and the characteristics of the disease; then choose the tool that is most appropriate.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The head may be injured either internally or externally; and when you have treated this injury with medicine, and it does not help, then cover the affected limb up to the point where the injury is, so that the patient escapes death, or the greater evil, from the defect in the limb; and the signs are that the limb becomes black, as if burned by fire, and after the blackness there is swelling; then this corruption spreads from limb to limb, and throughout the body; therefore be quick about covering it, and if it is due to the sting of some venomous creature, such as a sea-scorpion, adder, or similar, and the injury is on the head, then cover it, and do not give it any space to spread to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it reaches the hand, then cover at the joint so that the injury does not spread to the arm; and if it is on the arm, then cover at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, then it is fatal, and there is no treatment beyond the degree of its virtue; and thus do for any injury to the foot: if it is in the first joint, then cover after the other joint; and if it is on the foot, then cover the whole foot; and if it ascends into the leg, then cover at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, then there is no remedy but to cut off the limb, and the manner of covering it is to tie it above and below, and extend one implement down from one binding, and another implement up from the other binding, and cut away the flesh between the two bindings to a width of one span, so that the bone is exposed; then cover it with a silk cloth, and place a linen cloth on each side so that the silk does not touch the healthy part, and cause further injury or abscesses.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if bleeding occurs when you operate, cauterize the wound gently, or apply some restraining powders; then return to your treatment until it is complete, then bind the injured member with a suitable ligature and cure it until it heals; and I will tell you what happened to a man in his sleep: he developed a darkness that looked like a burn, and this corrosion first appeared on his big toe of the foot, spreading to cover the entire foot; and when the man saw the corrosion, he covered his foot and healed; and a long time after, the corrosion returned to his finger, and he came to me, and I applied reflective remedies after purification of the body, but could not stop the corrosions; and he wanted me to cut off his hand, and I did not want to, for I had hope of repelling the matter; and I also feared that if I cut off his hand, he would die, for the man's strength was weak; and he despaired completely, returned home, covered his hand, and healed; and I have never heard of anyone else doing this except for those who need it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Occasionally an abscess develops in a fleshy area, and remains for so long that it causes a great gathering of pus; and then it bursts and pierces, and the pus flows out, leaving the wound open like a vessel; and the skin above is as thin as a piece of cloth, and does not heal over to the bone or nerve, and such a disease is called 'sore', but is not called a 'fistula'; but if it is so extended that it reaches the bone deeply, then it is called a 'fistula'; and the skin is such that you can wrap around this skin all around, and especially when it is thin, like a piece of cloth; and it does not heal over from its decay.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you have reason to believe that the skin is healing over and the decay is not deep, and the flesh of the skin is thick, then cleanse with a clyster as follows: examine whether the breast is swollen, and the pus within has a foul odor, then prepare an Egyptian medicine thus: take ash, and oil, and litharge, in equal parts, and put the medicine into a vessel over a fire until it turns red, and becomes as thick as honey; and then take some according to your need, and dissolve it in water and honey, and clyster the breast, and squeeze out the pus; leave the medicine inside for two hours, then squeeze it out again; do this repeatedly, until the breast is cleaned out and the pus removed; and sometimes a clyster of ash-water is used when the Egyptian medicine is not available, and you take vine-ash, and pour water over it, then strain off the liquid, and clyster with this until you know that the breast is cleansed; if the patient cannot bear either the Egyptian medicine or the ash-water, then clyster with water and honey to which a little litharge has been added; or you can clyster with honey and wine in which the honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and the wine makes the wound bleed; and when you have done this, and you have reason to believe that the breast is cleansed, then clyster with something that causes flesh to grow in it, and you take diaphoretic ointment, and mix it with rose oil and wine; or you can clyster with other medicines and ointments of which I have spoken in the section on ointments; and if the opening of the breast is small, and the tube of the clyster cannot enter, then widen it a little with a sharp instrument, and put in some of the Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment, until it is widened enough; and if the wound is very large, then cut away only as much as will allow the clyster to enter, and if the opening that drains the pus is above, then cover it below where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Because when the bowels are in perfect health, one does not leave excrement in them; and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish, then prepare in such a way that the bowels move to the lowest place they can reach, for when the bowels are healthy, one does not leave excrement in them, and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish, then prepare in such a way: let the bowels move slightly downward, and do not leave anything of the bowels; and take consolative medicines to place over the wound, and they must be placed on top of a linen drape that covers all of the wound; then cover the wound firmly at its strongest point, making the opening larger than it was before, and apply a soothing ointment on the other drape according to the size of the wound, and place it on the wound to alleviate the bowels, and do not remove the large drape for several days; and that which is placed over the wound, often remove to eliminate the bowels, and examine what comes from them, whether it is venom or pus or blood, or digested or undigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in such a way and you see the nature that rises on top of the wound, then know that the breast has healed, and approach the wound; and then untie it in the morning, or at noon, and when you untie the wound, change the other drape, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast milk flows low and indigestible after many days, know that the breast does not open.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons creep slowly, you must not despair of health, for health draws near.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are wounds whose wound-fluid seeps slowly into the flesh, and others that do the opposite; and if indigestible bile erupts from the breast after many days, know that the breast is not healing; and if the breast is slow to heal and distant, apply dry medicines moist in substance but dry in virtue, as with diaphanous ointment, for it contains a great deal of vitriol, and that is the last medicine; take diaphanous ointment, which is made with rose oil, and arrosa of old wine equal in substance; then cook it down and use it as needed; and if diaphanous ointments are not available, take myrrh, aloe, and incense, grind them to powder over honey when it is on the fire; then glue a cloth with it and apply it to the breast, and at times administer aristology for a long time, and roots of celestial lilies, which is like flour of vesicants and centaury; and use simples or compounds: grind them to powder and put over the honey I mentioned above, and use as needed; and if the cure is slow, and not healed by this cure, then know that corruption is deep-seated, and makes impressions in bones, or in limbs, or in viscera; so treat the fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panaris is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the finger or toe, or occasionally in other places; and when it becomes infected, and no action is taken, an abscess forms, and it runs and discharges pus as far as the root of the nail, and sometimes all the way to the bone; and erosion occurs right down to the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the area around the digit becomes swollen, and the colour is red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have described in the previous section, and the treatment is ineffective, then you must cut away all the excess tissue that remains beneath the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cautery is a great help if the bone and nail are both healthy; and if the nail is pushing down on the flesh, and beginning to grow into it, causing inflammation, then you must put a thread under the nail so that it pushes the flesh upwards, and then carefully cut away the flesh, using burning and corrosive medicines to remove all of it; then treat the wound with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	If the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it out and pull it out, because as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal; and if you see the corruption spreading, then cut it in half at the joint as previously described, then treat the wound until it heals; and if it becomes infected and swollen, and causes great pain, then you must treat it first; then cut the nail of the affected finger diagonally from above, and be careful that the cut does not go all the way to the flesh under the nail, because the patient would feel too much pain; and if this happens, place something on it to soothe the pain.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of a deafness in the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two toenails that sometimes grow on people's hands by chance are sometimes all flesh, and sometimes they have bones, and sometimes they have nails, and some grow from the root of the joint, or from one of the toes.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	He who is born with an extra tooth in his gum will not move, but he who is born at the joint of the gum may move; the one whose gum is fleshy has a light wound, thus: cut it at its root with a wide spathe.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure; if you hold it tightly.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For one who is born with an extra tooth in the gum at the back, you should first cut away the round flesh to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable silk thread, then heal it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joints that come together come by birth, or by joint wound, or by burn from fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Then you should cut that seam so that the gums fit together according to their natural shape; then put between two tents or dampened cloth in rose oil so that they do not stick together; or put between two pieces of thin lead, until the gum is healed, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If sealing occurs on one of his hands with the palm, then treat that wound as it should be treated.
des vils	of the villainous
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Veins are thick enveloped vessels filled with melancholy superfluities, which come in many parts of the body; and they occur more often in legs of those who walk and work and carry things, than in others.Et plus que en celles de celz qui montent a cheval et sont plus en trais et demourent en lieu.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should administer to him a cleansing enema, and then the basilicon ointment.Et li amonestre et la maniere dou saine et dou cautere, et que il doit faire, si te veult dire.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cure with fire is in two ways: one is that one cauterizes and draws out the black blood; and the other way is that you open a vein and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The incision is done in this way: first, raise the leg with very hot water until the large veins are made small, then stretch the leg from above the thigh to the part below the knee; then cut the vein in one place, or two or three, with a broad incision, and then open and draw out the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the virtue of the medicine can endure; and then tie it off, and instruct him to apply a poultice of black cole on top; and restart the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are closed up, and bandage the wound.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The treatment for this is as follows: raise the leg of the patient, if there are many hairs, then put it in the bath, and pour hot water over the leg until it turns red and the veins swell; and if you do not have a bath, heat it by the fire, and then press the vein from the top down to the knee, or in the part below the ankle; then open the skin at the base of the nail, and scrape the vein on each side, until it appears when you feel it; and you will see it red and black, and when it enters the skin, it looks like a white cord; then tie the thread under, so that it is lifted from the skin, and then it can be pulled at another hook, as before; then make another incision, or several if necessary, then lift and cut into the leg to the toe, then pull and lift until you reach the second incision; then pull it out of the incision, until it is all out, and then cut it off; and if you cannot pull and lift it, tie a strong double thread under it, and tie and pull it, and tie it under the thread, and turn your hand from side to side until it comes out; be careful not to cut it, because if it cuts, it cannot be pulled or lifted, and it causes harm to the patient. And when you have finished treating it, put moistened wool in wine and rose oil over the wound site; and cure it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vein is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it twistedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron with which one cauterizes the vein is curved, and does not cut, so that it does not pierce the vein; and it is of a gross curve, for if it were subtle, it would pierce the vein, but it must be thick as we have said, and thus is the shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in the legs, in hot regions where no herbs or trees grow, and in land without moisture; and by chance it grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens from the pustules that come under the skin, as do snakes and worms, growing between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this wound are that a great inflammation comes in the leg, then the place changes, and the wound begins to come out forcefully, just as the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the shoulder opens, you should wrap a piece of plank about three and a half to four inches around it, and the knot, and let the plank hang on the leg, and every time it comes out of its socket, wrap it around the plank and the knot; and if it is too long, cut off a part and wrap the rest, but do not cover the root while it is still coming out; for if you cover it, it will go back into the flesh and cause an abscess and swelling in the spot, and for this reason it should be treated little by little until the head, and nothing remains in the body; and sometimes this wound is as long as five or ten palm-lengths, and a man came to me once who had one that issued ten palm-lengths, and when you cover it, plug the hole or opening, and bore to the bottom so that all of it comes out, and evacuate the matter within, and apply healing medicines to the spot for several days, then treat it as you would an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes this vein bleeds profusely, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or the leg, and much blood flows out, and from which it rains; therefore treat it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	from worms that grow between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called "cow disease" in our land because it often affects cows. It is caused by a small worm that grows between the skin and flesh, moving throughout the body, ascending and descending, until it breaks out of the skin, often causing much damage. It is similar to the harm done by worms, snakes, and earthworms in the belly; and one fears its malice, for when it moves through the body and reaches the head, it can enter and destroy the eye. This has happened many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being cured and treated, you cannot hold it back except when it bleeds: therefore, you must tie the area above and below with a strong string tied tightly, then press on it from above and draw it out forcefully; and if the pus is deep in the flesh, and you do not bring it out, cauterize it with fire until it comes out; and the greatest harm that it does is that it runs into the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming near the eye, tighten under it firmly, then press on it from above and draw it out forcefully; and one must use the cleansing of the body with medicines that dissolve bad humors, and use cauterization with flesh-corroding substances for pus.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	from the pain that comes from wind
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called "vacering" in our land, and it is a pain that comes in some members, and then moves from member to member; and I saw what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and I uncovered her arm, and saw a small swelling on the vein of the arm; and a little later, I saw it rise up like a worm to the shoulder, faster than anything else, as bright as silver when it moves from one place to another; the pain left that spot, and settled in the shoulder, and then a little later ran through the whole body, until it reached the other arm; then she told me that she was spinning around the body, just as I saw her.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was very surprised how she moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease progress in this way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Nevertheless, I have often seen pain move from one place to another, but not as I saw it in the woman; and I thought that it was because women's bodies are dry, and their veins exposed, and this windiness appears constrained for this reason, and not according to this reason in those who are plump, and have moist bodies and relaxed veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels the pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then press above and below gently, and then apply a poultice until that forced wind leaves its place; and cauterize the spot; and if you do not see it yourself, then treat it with those who expel winds, such as foul pills, and serapin pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearance and according to the part of the body where they land.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The variety of them is that there are some with large points, and small, and barbed, and smooth; and some with two angles, and some with tongues, and some with pieces; and those that break in a limb break in two ways: either in a principal member, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, stomach, intestine, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When she falls in any of these places on the body, and you see the signs of death that I will tell you about later, then you must be wary of removing this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many cases; and if you do not see these bad signs, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then pull it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the signs of trepanation when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, and if there is a blow to the brain above the cerebrum, are scalp-lacerations and cuts and blisters and redness, inflammation and reddening of the tongue, spasms and loss of consciousness, vomiting of blood; and perhaps there is bleeding from the nose or ears; and often they lose their speech and voice; and if there is white moisture oozing from the wound like pus, and also a bruise-like appearance, then be wary of trepanation, and pull out the arrow if it is not deep.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The signs of the seventh are that it lies near the left breast, and feels as though it were stuck to something hard, and not hollow; and sometimes the seventh is mute like the pulses, and discharges black blood, and there comes a chill and cold sweat, and syncope: then know beyond doubt that death is near.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow wound that affects the lung is spitting foam from the wound, and a swollen throat, and the patient changes color, and breathes heavily and seeks the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow pierces the covering of the foot, it affects the small bones; and there is great pain and swelling and discomfort, and the patient feels pain throughout their shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow pierces the stomach, by chance some undigested food may come out through the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow pierces the intestines in the abdomen, and no feces escape through the rear end, then there is no hope for a cure or for removing the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	If the arrow pierces the bladder, and urine escapes and flows outward, and the patient feels intense pain, know that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, armpit, spine of the back, hip, thigh, and leg, and similar limbs, are safe according to various dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	Once an arrow struck a man in the jaw near the root of the ear; I probed it and pulled it out from under the fat of the ear, and he was healed without any numbness.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And I extracted an arrow from the jaw of a boy which had pierced through the fatty tissue under the eye socket, and the arrow was lodged there, with only its tip protruding towards the nose; the arrow was as thick as a Turkish bowstring, and made of iron, and light in weight; the boy was healed and no ill effects followed.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And I extracted an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arab arrow that had pierced his ears; I cut off the barbs, and pulled gently until I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And I extracted an arrow from a man's body that had pierced his chest or belly, and I thought he would die; but after thirty days, his condition did not worsen; so I cut into the shaft of the arrow, and removed the barbed tip, pulling it out without any adverse effects.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a man with an arrow in his back, and the wound is sewn up on top; as long as the arrow remains inside him, and his natural functions are not impaired, nor any harm found in any of his natural processes.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And you will see another man whom an arrow has pierced in the face, and the wound is sewn up; he remains thus without great pain, and many other similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And took an arrow to the home of the prince king, who was shot in the eye, and it was slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrow was all drawn out I was called to the cure after three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I wanted to probe it with a subtle instrument, and I didn't feel anything; and he felt stabbing and pain below his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow I applied a digestive and atraumatic poultice to the site, so that the swelling would go down; and the mark of the arrow appeared to me.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the poultice again and again, and the wound healed quickly, and the patient suffered for a long time, as long as he felt the arrow in his eye; and he told me about it.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I placed medicine made of corrosive earth on the wound for several days until it was exposed and I could feel the tip of the arrowhead; then I applied the medicine to the wound opening so that the head of the arrow appeared clearly, and after about four months the wound healed completely and I was able to extract the arrow with tweezers. I probed and manipulated the wound with instruments for several days until one day I was able to grasp it with well-made tweezers, as described at the end of this chapter, and extracted it, healing the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And they believed that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored; so I restored it and the wound was closed and the patient fully healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Here I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your care into what I do not say, because books cannot encompass everything; but wise masters consider well about very few things, and about what is present and lacking to them, they find new work, and new instruments, in the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows grow in the members where they are stuck in two ways: either by the place where they enter or by another part; and that which grows out by the place where it enters is an arrow entering into muscular tissues, and sometimes it grows out now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not grow out now, then leave it as long as the tissue around it becomes rotten and the outlet is relieved; and also if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, then leave it for several days, and move it every day; and then it will grow out, and if it does not, then pierce through to the very tip of a subtle forest, as long as the outlets around are enlarged, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the skull and goes to one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the accidents which I have mentioned appear in the patient: then do not extract it, but let it be until it becomes even after a few days, for if the arrow goes to the brain, that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is lodged only in the bone and does not go to the brain, and the patient remains for several days without any bad symptoms, then prepare an instrument for extraction.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very swollen and cannot come out, then administer blisters around it, as I have told you; then clean the area until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is lodged deep in the body where it cannot be seen, then search for it throughout the body; and if you feel it, extract it with an appropriate instrument; and if because of the depth of the wound and the penetration of the arrow there is no bone, nerve, or vein in the way, then open the wound widely; and if there are ears on the arrow by which it is lodged, remove the flesh around them from both sides as far as you can, and then bend or twist the ears of the arrow so that you can extract it; and be careful not to break the arrow, lest you push it further in.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot on one try, then leave it until the wound around it is swollen; then pull it out, for extraction is eased.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the bleeding makes it contrary, then administer what we have said about the cure in its chapter; and guard against incising the nerve and the vein, and put in a splint how you can best pull out the arrow without peril, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and put the patient according to the shape he was in when the arrow fell into him, for that is the greatest help there is. And if you cannot do it that way, then put him according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes out from another place, or something is seen to come out of it, or the skin is swollen in an obvious way so that one can see or feel it: cut on top of it, until the tweezers can grab it, and then pull it out; thus jump out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	If it is stuck in the bone, rotate your hand rapidly, forcing it into the bone and widening the opening; then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, then leave it and try again to pull it out until it comes out; and if there is a piece of the arrow inside, then take it out all at once; and if the shaft is broken, and you see that you can administer a bout, then administer the instrument chewed, so that the point of the arrow enters into the chew of the instrument; and then pull out, and if the arrow is chewed, then put the instrument with its point entering in to ease the extraction.Et s’il aduit que li saiette sont entres en l’estrument cheveit, et ne puisent issir, si failles de la tenaile sus la cheveure de l’estrument tant qu’i soient pres ens, et puis i triche; car il aduit que li saiettes, quant il sont entres en li estraments cheveitz, qu’il se tenaint le plus fort par la cheveure.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow has touched [the wound], then you must cut away all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can; then treat the wound as it should be.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If the arrow pierces the foot or leg or stomach or bladder or side, and it is deep, and you can cut it out; then be careful not to cut into the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then close the wound, if necessary; and treat it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to treat arrows is similar to an owl's beak; see the diagram.
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	There are many types: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the broad-headed arrowhead is also like the feather of a bird, to catch on the tip of the arrow, just as its shape is:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the form of tongs for pushing and probing is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of common body veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are XXXI veins that heal: in the head there are XVI, namely: two batons located behind the ears, called the "herbech"; and the II arteries that are in the II temples, visible; and II veins that are in the II corners of the II eyes, called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the II windpipes that are in the neck; and the II veins that are above the lips, these are the veins called "augeherich"; and the II veins that are below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins that are commonly used for bleeding are five in each arm: one is the cephalic vein, located on the left side of the neck, and the common people call it "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "fast", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and the common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein is located on the right side of the neck, and the common people call it "vein of the belly", and it is above the cubital fossa, and it is that one through which bleeding is done, which opens clearly above the elbow.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the salvatelle is the vein that is between the little and ring fingers, and it has two branches; and in the leg there are three veins: one is below the crease of the elbow on the left side of the neck, and the second is at the ankle on the right side of the neck; and the vein that is called  "nesse", which is at the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The bleeding of veins that are behind the ears is helped by old catarrhs and by emigration; and the qualities of the bleeding, as I told you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then wring the patient's neck with a rope until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places hanging from the head; then hold them in your fingers and where you feel the pulse under your fingers, sign there; then take the lance and pierce under the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein upstream, and pierce through the skin and the vein well with both hands, and let the blood out until you see it; then tie it off and stop it, until it is healed; and I have already said about incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The bleeding of the two arteries that are in the temples, is useful for long-standing migraine, and for sore eyes and habitual obtalmia, and for the body of tears and agues in the eyes; and the quality of the bleeder is as I have said: and it is that the patient strains his neck so that the two veins appear clearly; and feel the pulse under your thumb, and then sign with your finger; then raise the vein at the top of your finger and insert the lancette underneath, and raise the vein at the top, and cup it, as you have done in the other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need; then release the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it; and then bind it tightly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of their binding and their release at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The bleeding of the vein in the forehead is just as bad as the bleeding from the cephalic vein in old diseases of the face, and in hemiplegia and paralysis; and the qualities are such that the patient turns his neck until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fosseur", whose form is this:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point over the vein, and press firmly with your hand or something else, and let the blood issue according to the amount that you see; then loosen the neck of the patient, and ligate the vein until it is healed, and sometimes the operation is done with a large flamethrower.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not appropriate for the flames to be too sharp; and heal across, because the bone is close by, and perhaps break the flames when they are fine.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The bleeding of the two veins that are in the eyelids helps with styes, and paralysis, and redness, and inflammation of the eye, and diseases of the face; and the qualities of their bleeding are such that the patient turns his neck by twisting some ligament, as before; then he is bled, and the bleeding should be through the transverse vein, a little from the long vein, with a slightly larger flamethrower, because there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, perhaps they will break; then draw blood, as much as you need, and then bind it with cotton, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The bleeding of the vein in the nose is good for ague, and for a violent fever, and for facial diseases, such as migrains and redness that comes in the face, and especially when it is old; and the quality of the bleeding is that the patient squeezes his neck, then pulls out his nose to your left hand, takes a long, thin flame, and inserts it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein doesn't open well otherwise, and the blood will start flowing immediately; and don't go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then ligate it for one night, because it is quickly restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The bleeding of the two sinuses helps with strangulation of the throat, and with the beginning of measles, and many diseases, and with empyema, and with ulceration, and with herpes, and with ulcers; and the quality of the bleeding is that the patient squeezes his neck from underneath on both sides, as we have said; and let the master stand over the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a chair, then bleed the vein for a long time quite widely, then draw the blood temperately, or as much as is needed; then do the same in the other vein, then loosen the ligature, and squeeze both veins gently so that the patient does not choke; and let it be until morning so that the wound may heal.
de la sainie des leivres	of bleeding gums
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	Here is the translation: The bleeding of the veins in the lips above helps with sores in the mouth, and gum corruption, and splits in the lips, and the pain of teeth and gums.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the qualities of bleeding are to have the patient sit before you and strain their neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and they are known by being black, and by having around them small black veins: so compress the one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you doubt, then compress the largest of each side, and likewise do with the two veins that are above and below, for it is a similar manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of bleeding under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The bleeding of veins that are beneath the tongue is helped after the bleeding of the cephalic vein; this is done by constricting the throat, and for diseases of the eye and mouth; and the quality of the bleeding should be such that the patient seizes between your hands in front of the sun, and releases the tongue, and looks underneath on each side for a black vein: therefore bleed both, and do not go too deep, for beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the head from which one usually bleeds are bled in two ways: either with a piercing flame of a large myrtle twig, or with a subtle olive wood stick as thin as a toothpick, and is called "anesil"; and they are large and thin according to the width and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the candle flame is very important, and it should be as wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the flat veins of the head that contain thick and obvious blood; and this is the shape of the olive wood stick:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more pointed and suitable for bleeding the subtle veins where there is thin, yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps diseases that are under the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the abdomen; and the doctor must cauterize it bleeding, and protect the artery underneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he pierces the artery and bleeding occurs, it must be stopped as I said before; but the flame should not be grasped, only trimmed like a candle.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilic does not open obviously, then you must probe it and change to another vein; or take some blood from him, or cauterize the vein in his arm: it will open obviously; and cauterize it with the flame anesil, as we have said before.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you want to find the location of the cautery, then you must stretch out the arm and feel for the pulse; then mark the spot inside, and then tie up the arm, and cauterize the vein with the anesil flame; and be careful not to pierce the artery when you see the spot puffed up, because that is the artery: avoid it therefore.Et si tu ne puet aler plus a l’endercheure, si covient que tu retournes et saines la voinne dou flaime anesil; car li sang qui vout sortisse, si est de l’artere, ou de la veine.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it spurt upwards like a child's urine, and the blood is red and thin, know that this is blood from an artery: therefore hurry up, and place your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, as often happens; tie up the arm, and leave it thus, and do not move it until the patient is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood is not staunched and it flows, and you have no medicine, then compress the artery as it opens, for that is where the blood comes from; and stop the flow of blood.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a piece of white willow bark, split it and take one half and tie it on firmly until the next day; if the bleeding stops, that is good; if not, then stop it with the powders that stanch blood, as we have said; but the stopping of the bleeding does not matter much in most cases because of the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The bleeding from an artery in the middle [of the body] is helped by it drawing blood from the head above and the body below because it is made of basil and cedar, as we have said; and the surgeon must be careful not to damage the nerve underneath, and if he cuts too deep into it, and inflames and injures it, and perhaps prevents healing; and this nerve often opens up, and if it does not open in some men because of its thinness, then you should treat it with the instrument anesil; and be careful of the nerve as much as you can.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, they cut it deeply.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The vein in the head, if it bleeds, aids the eyes; and one should bleed it with a flame from an olive or myrtle brand, for it is the safest of all veins, since it has neither nerve nor artery beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Nevertheless, one should seek the lightest place, and not hurt at all if one misses the first time, and try again; and by chance, some men's parts may become swollen when they miss the first time, but it does no harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the bleeding is according to your thoughts.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you should know about bleeding is that it is not done merely to maintain health and prevent illness; bleeding is performed in one of three veins: the head, the arm, or the leg. It should be done at the beginning of Lent, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of digestion are apparent. One should bleed on the first or third day, after two or three hours of the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The bleeding which is administered for illnesses has no fixed time, but when there is a need, at any hour and at all times; and children should not be bled until they are 14 years old, nor women who are pregnant beyond the fourth month until the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should the very old who have passed 60 years be bled.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone wants to bleed, in whatever way it is, it is necessary to clear the intestines with a gentle enema if they have much retained feces so that the veins do not draw harmful superfluities from the intestines into the principal limbs; one should not bleed those who are too full from meat, nor those who are drunk, as long as they remain so, or those who are suffering from dropsy. And one should not bleed after a colic attack, vomiting, diarrhea, and excessive urination in women, or after exertion, watching all night, fasting, or any other activity that weakens the body, either from injury to the body or illness; then subtilize the humors if the blood is thick, through food and drink and medicine, if you have the skill. Then enter a bath if nothing impedes it, in order to subtilize the blood, and bleed from the vein on the foot around midnight, as we have said. And that day one should avoid exertion, and luxury, and similar things; and be calm and cheerful, and let the bleeder sit higher than the person being bled, and he should massage the arm two or three times, then tighten the ligature over it gently, for if it is too tight or too loose, it will not draw the blood. Then he should massage the area with his hands until the veins rise, and they can be felt; then he should moisten the blade of the bleeding knife with a little old oil, then place his left thumb on that vein below the site where he wants to bleed, so that the vein does not withdraw from the knife.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	Because there are veins that flow like cords to the wound, and some are filled with windiness, so that when one puts fire upon it, it withdraws from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of those; and if he opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, for which reason the surgeon should be adept in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens the first time, it is good; if not, one must try again a little lower on that place or above, if the area isn't swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the wound is swollen and the patient is fearful, leave it for a day or two without binding the arm: perhaps hot abscesses will form; nor enter the bath, then begin the bleeding again if she pleases; and if the opening is small, let the blood flow gently through it and you doubt that as much blood does not issue as you wish, then apply the flame directly to that very opening; and work the wound gently, so that the limb becomes swollen; for this happens many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the vein swollen, do not re-bandage it but put a little linseed oil on it, for it lightens the body of blood, and in this place the linseed oil turns into fat; and so apply linseed oil to every bandage that you use for opening veins, to stop the flow of blood. And when applied to the wound, it acts subtly on the blood and disperses it when it is too abundant.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if large abscesses arise, which often happen, especially when the opening of the vein is small and the issue of blood is slight, then hasten and apply a sponge moistened with warm water to the wound, and hold it in place for an hour; and you should do this after the flow of blood from the vein has ceased. If any blackness or greenness remains in the wound afterwards, it does no harm; and if you see anything, apply some aloe or myrrh reduced to a pulp with rosewater, or something similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there is an abscess and appearance of pus at the base of the thumb: therefore, put your hand on it, and if you feel softness with the pressure of your hand, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore be sure not to place anything on the wound that we have mentioned, for it might enter the artery; but make a dry ointment to harden the area, then heal it with another healing remedy, until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to its blood flow and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if it appears thick, let it flow until it becomes thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for one who is full and swollen, and needs bloodletting, to make a larger wound, and the incision should be wider; and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and he should be bled little and often, and it must be bled by cutting diagonally, not puncturing; and this method of bleeding is safe from blood flowing and nerve damage, and is better than bleeding from a long or wide incision.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for one whose body needs bleeding, give moist bread in pomegranate juice; if he is heated, it should be given three or four times before the bleeding. And if his complexion is cold, eat moist bread dipped in syrup of myrrh, or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and caraway, and fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints after losing a lot of blood, then he should drink a broth made from meat, and a subtle scented syrup, and use the other things we mentioned in the section on syncope, for the opening of a vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to open his arm and bleed again, he should do so little by little according to the amount of his continuing strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And those who want to open their arms after the first bleeding, and they have a strong body, should bleed .7 hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to bleed elsewhere, they should bleed on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is a lot of blood inside the body that has been heated and causes fever; so you must draw out a large quantity and widen the opening until it bleeds freely; then you should dress the wound as usual, and place your hand over his pulse while he heals, so that death does not come to him through the vein; this often happens when the surgeon is negligent. Also, when you see the arm loosening and the blood flowing out a second time, and the opening is closed, you must not press on it directly; nor if it is crooked, should you straighten the arm forcefully, for that would be harmful; instead, let him heal while his arm is relaxed; or you can touch the wound with the tip of a flame until the frozen blood at the vein's opening melts, then apply a little cold water and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not bind it, until the abscess is soothed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, let it be in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The veins in the arms are healthy in the area of the vein in the head because it is composite.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of healing is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the vein turns red; then it should be let to drain slowly so that the vein appears clearly, then the wound should be bound tightly across, not from side to side or lengthwise; and the opening should be wide, and it should be bound close to the joint of the hand, and if it cannot drain, then put the hand back in hot water and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough; and if it is winter, do not re-immerse the hand in hot water, for it is more immersing than in the summer; and the healing of this vein is safer than all other veins, as there are no arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The healing of the salvation of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the method: straighten the hand and put it in hot water until the vein is swollen, as one can see; and if the vein is bound across, and you cover it completely from top to bottom, then there will be no harm; and do not go too deep, for the nerves are completely naked under the flesh. Then put the hand back in hot water if the blood has congealed in the wound and cannot drain.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have finished treating the blood as necessary, put oil and silk on the vein to seal it temporarily, and do the same for each vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The bleeding in the left hand is beneficial for the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I have told you about the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The salve of the soporific plant is good for all diseases beneath the body, such as diseases of the brain, and retention of fluids, and diseases of the kidneys, and of the hips and legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of its salve are such that the patient should soak their feet in hot water, and rub the salve onto the vein until it breaks, and apply it above the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, and running up the foot, treat the largest vein there, or at the ankle, whichever is better.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal it on the foot, then guard against the nerves that are underneath, and heal it across as well as up-and-down; and let the flames be anaesthetized.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot flow out, then immerse the foot in water and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the salve fails on the first attempt, try again a little higher up, for the place is salty; do not worry about nerves, as we have said, and similarly prepare the other foot in the same way.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The location of the sciatic vein is at the ankle, and its pulsation relates to the pain in the hip when there is hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the qualities of its salve are such that the patient should enter the bath, and twist their ankle IIII times, for otherwise the vein will not open; and if it does open, treat it in all ways you can, and by crossing over; and it is better to cover it, for the place is safe, and it is very effective for many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not believe this, cut a vein in the leg, either in front or behind, and towards the little toe, and be careful of the nerves; and let blood flow until it stops, then loosen the bandage, and place cotton on it, and bind it tightly; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	from cupping marks
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping glasses are made of horn, or bronze, or glass; and cupping is performed according to two methods: either by cutting and drawing blood, or without cutting.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping which is done by burning is performed in two ways: with or without fire; and cupping which is performed by burning and by bloodletting is carried out in 14 places on the body, one of which is on top of the head; another on the neck; two others on either side of the neck; a cup under the chin; cups on both shoulders; cups on the buttocks; cups on the upper arms; cups on the lower legs; and cups on the ankles. Cupping should not involve any bloodletting, except for small veins that are scattered throughout the body, so it does not weaken the patient in any way, as is done with bloodletting. It should also not be performed with or without fire in any disease that comes from repletion until the whole body has been emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if by necessity of sickness one must bleed, or due to habit, then we treat them every hour at the beginning of the month, or at its end, and in between, and at all times; for there are some who, when they need to bleed, have a heavy head; and there are those who experience bloating and redness in their face, and in their head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes; and there are those who experience a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and vomit blood; and there are those who dream, and see through their eyelids things that are bad, and sad, and deadly, and similar.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially if it is during the month, we command them to fast after the third hour of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The bleeding of the nose helps with headaches ... that comes to the eyes, and should not be after the evacuation of the whole body; and this venting is in place of the bleeding of the head, and should not be used by those of a cold complexion, or who have catarrh, for it does them great harm; and because of this the old men should not use it, nor those with cold diseases in their heads.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who heal themselves frequently, become oblate, and because of this, one should place the leech lower down for fear of oblate.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation in the neck is located at the intersection of the windpipe and the basilic vein, and it helps to relieve pressure on the feet, and to open up the channels of the lungs, and to ease congestion and fullness; and it should be used sparingly, for if held too long, it will harm the stomach and the heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The second pair of ventilations in the neck help with headaches, eye pain and inflammation, strangulation, tooth pain, and they are located at the intersection of the basilic vein; instruct the surgeon to express his hand when placing them so that he does not press on the artery and cause bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The windings under the chin are good for mouth diseases, and gum decay, and similar diseases which are in the mouth; and it is in the sanctuary of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The windings on the shoulders are good for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The ventilations in the armpits are like three veins in the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins; instruct the surgeon to not go too deep, for underneath there is bare flesh, and beneath that are nerves and arteries.Li ventosation en la paume de la main si vaut a dolors et a repletion de la main et des doigtz, et est en leu de la sainie dou pis; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il ne cope mie l’artere.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping glass placed on the nape of the neck is useful for hemorrhoids and diseases below, and it should be a large cup made of copper, which it needs to effectively draw out blood; and if it were thin, it might break and cause large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	Cupping glasses on the legs heal very effectively, as they draw blood from the entire body, and are good for treating long-standing pains in the joints, the hips, and the bladder, and they relax the body in various conditions. They are placed at the .ij. sophenes, that is, the .ij. ankles, and yet they weaken the body after a long time, and bring on fainting in some people.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the suction cup is that you first place it empty, and gently suck, and apply it firmly, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the area become red and swollen, and the redness of blood appears; then let go, and re-apply the suction cups, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are those who have very thick skin and clear pores: one must strike only once, and one should make wide wounds, and a little deep; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the vein is thick, it is necessary to strike .ii times: the first time to open the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the vein is very thick, it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we want to draw blood a little at a time, we only need to strike once.Car li sans espés ne se traist pas en un coup, si est il necessaire de ferir la tierce fois.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want a lot of blood, we must suck repeatedly; and if the blood is thick, we pierce it with a needle, and the parts so that the heart be pierced suddenly, and it suits those who have thick and tough skin, and who have narrow pores, to anoint the places of the ventouses with an aperitif and dissolving oil: if it is in the summer, with violet oil, or with sweet almond oil, or with pumpkin seed oil; and if it is in the winter, with watercress oil, or lily, or chamomile, or similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, take oil of amarant, or of balsam, or dill oil, and the like.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one we heal has tender flesh and wide pores, no oil should be applied, but it must be washed after cupping with rosewater, or cold water, or mulberry water, or pumpkin water, or porcelain water, or similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have a lot of moisture, if they rise from parsley, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large swellings should drink old wine, or water from a spring, or a decoction of fennel or camomile, or similar things; and one should not bleed with leeches before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and one should not sleep after being bled, and it is necessary that he be warm when he is to be bled and when he has been bled.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And be wary if the person being bled is choleric, and if the blood is too thick and inflamed; then one should eat cold things like pomegranates, endive and lettuce with garlic, and similar things; and drink juices of plants, and charcoal from a fire, and moist foods.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those with a cold complexion should drink honey syrup, and moderate old wine mixed with young, and plant juices, and juices of small birds and squabs; and the day one is to be bled, one should drink more than eat; and it is good to give some men a little triacle or musk before or after bleeding to strengthen the main organs; and the blood must be thin but not for those with a hot temperament.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The cupping glasses that are placed without burning are those that are placed on the liver, and on the testicles, and on the gout, and on the belly, and on the buttocks, and on the thighs, and on the hips; for these members do not bear being burned under the eyes, and it is only done to draw blood from member to member, as we place them on the breasts when the nipples are healthy; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we place cupping glasses on the belly and buttocks to reduce the member; and it relieves pain when there is obstruction or stone, and by its attractive power it may draw out the obstruction or dislodge the stone from its place; and thus it acts when it is placed on the liver and on the testicles when there is retained flatulence, and these cupping glasses are administered empty merely to suck; and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water, as in diseases of the pleura, and in this way one fills the cupping glass with warm water alone, or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the fire cupping is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	It is two fingers wide and a half palm deep, and it has a small hole around the middle for pushing in an awl, made of bronze, smooth at the front so that it does not bleed the patient when placed on the limb; and in the middle there is a crossbar of bronze or iron, to hold a candle, and they are large and small according to the illnesses and the age of those who use them; for the ventouses used by children are different from those used by the elderly, and by the thin from the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And you must place this ventouse on the limb thus: take the candle of wax or the linen and place it inside the ventouse through the bar in the middle, so that the flame is at the bottom of the ventouse and does not burn the patient; then place it on the limb, and hold your fingers over the hole we mentioned, so that when you want to, the vapour escapes, and remove the ventouse. Then take the linen as before and repeat frequently if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the glass cupping used for treatment of pleurisy, all types of acute diseases have no stem or opening, and are not relieved unless they are full of water, and are placed on the limb alone; and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Leeches are not relieved unless in members where one cannot place cupping due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in bare flesh, such as toes or fingers, and others; and the quality of using them is that when you find leeches that are in clean sweet water without burrowing, then take them; and put one in sweet water, until they become accustomed and have nothing in their bellies; and then be bled from a vein and with cupping, then rub the member until it turns red, and place the leeches on it; and when they are full and bite, if it is a place where one can use cupping, then do so, for it is much better afterward.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, then raise the site with a pillow, and then with water, very gently, and then compress it; and if the bite marks are too close to the body of the leech, moisten a linen cloth in cold water, and place it over the bite, until the leech is suffocated; and if the bites are multiplied, place ground vitriol, or gall, and similar things, over the site, until they are suffocated; or place half a handful of peeled peas over the site, and leave them until they turn red around the bite, and it will then stop bleeding; and if you need more, take other leeches.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the leeches will not attach, then rub the bite mark with fresh blood, or stick a needle into it so that some blood comes out, and then place the leeches over it, and as soon as they smell the blood, they will attach; and when you see that they are defecating, then powder some ground aloe, or salt, or ash over them, and they will stop now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is a remedy for fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that the foolish people who read this chapter will not find it in any of the ancient books, nor will they read any letters; and for this reason knowledge is strange in our land, for I have never found a good one; and I know nothing except through the science of the ancient books, in which I have studied so much that I have acquired knowledge through them, and through experimentation, and by living a life of habit; and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained within it, and have abbreviated it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, just as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we should say in the prologue of this book the sums of the matter and the chapters in which the sage places his understanding, and dwells upon their truth, so that those who have experience know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or fracture occurs in someone, you should hurry to heal the patient from both sides, if nothing else prevents it, such as weakness of the body, or old age; or if the weather is not very hot, or too cold; and eat cold foods, that is, cold joints, and deer and hare meat, and do not drink any wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and do not fill yourself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you have reason to suspect a hot abscess, or the discharge of matter from the limb; then return the patient to their previous treatment.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	When the broken bone begins to heal, the patient should be nourished with foods that promote swelling or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, testicles, pigs' feet, pig's belly, eggs, fresh fish, and full-bodied wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	Because with such nourishing the swelling will subside and the break will heal more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well healed or united according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children; but have no worry, reset the broken bone, the large tendons that stretch and join the limb together, as tightly as it was before; and do not stop at all in his work, and for this one should eat lots of meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And you should know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different than the fracture of the foot, or of the leg; and in this chapter I will tell you about all types of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another that is only skin deep, like the cut of a quill pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture that is just a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And in each way, there is its own method and proper instrument for restoration, according to what the memory comes to mind; and the fracture of the bone is known by the fact that the limb is twisted, and it appears well from an external blow, and sounds when pressed with the hand; and when there is no twisting or pain on touch, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no fracture; but there may be twisting, or splitting, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It is not advisable to move it by hand, but apply remedies that come later, and then hold it firmly but gently now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the fracture that goes into a tree, and the two parts are separated, they should now be brought together evenly, so that hot abscesses may come; and if cold abscesses come, then leave it for a day, until the abscess is healed; then put it equal to the movement that you can easily and gently, and know that the restoration of this one is easier than the restoration of that which has pieces; then hold it as it should be afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if it is in two parts, whether it is a hand or a foot, or your hand if it is a small member, or at two strings, or at one string and your hand; and put the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are separated, then bring them back together by all means in their places as you can, and be careful that your work does not cause injury or pain to the patient; and join the two heads of the bones well according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel it with your hand if it doesn't seem right; then set it straight, but don't over-tighten or press too hard as those who cause hot abscesses and contractions in the limb by their treatment, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is at its worst, then treat the patient carefully so that he does not move it, whether waking or sleeping, turning or in any other way; and be sure that the limb is secured so that he feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	Because when he feels no pain, then it is not at its worst, and you should put him in a good position so that he feels no pain; and be careful that he is placed straight, so that no crookedness comes to him when he is restored; and the qualities of the broken member are according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs vary in size, shape, and appearance.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small members, such as arms and hands and the like: these should be wrapped with soft, fine linen; and for larger ones, such as thighs and legs, use a broad, tough bandage, for broad bandages embrace the whole large limb and constrict it evenly all around, so that no swelling remains; then wind light bandages three or four times according to the limb, and tighten your hand a little at every turn of the bandage, then go over the broken part and tighten less, so that the fracture is moved away a little; then soften the bandage little by little, until you grasp a large part of the sound area, then take another bandage and wind it around straight again over the broken part; then go back to the part under the fracture and tighten gently, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we said in the first hour above; then place soft linen or bandages between the bandages, until they are all even, then bind everything on top with a bandage, and then place your splints well-fitted over it, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, put something hot on the abscess to reduce the swelling, and leave it for a few days; then stretch it over a wooden board, and let it be half the width of a broad cane, or a palm-branch, and let it be in this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	but the board that is placed under the dislocation should be a little thicker and wider than the others; and it should be as long as the smallness or size of the limb requires; then stretch it over the boards as you did at the first stretching, and tie a string properly, as you did on the dislocation; the tighter it is, the better; and the strings should be medium-thin, not too thick nor too thin, and made of soft flax; for if the strings are thick, as I have seen foolish people do, tying their bandages with cords of twisted flax, it is a great error, because the bandage cannot be even if it is too thin, and there should not be less than two fingers' width between each board.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is nervous because of the stars after the pressing in their healthy areas, then put under them flaxen lint or linen rags so that it does not hurt.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by a fracture, and the bone is broken, I will describe the treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And you should know that it is not advisable to manipulate all broken bones on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	Because when the member is swollen, you should not put splints on it for more than five or seven days, or longer depending on the heat of the abscess; and here is the method of ancient plasters to heal fractures, dislocations, and twists: take flour that is kept on the walls of the mill, mix it with a lot of egg, and apply this preparation, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it. This is the common way to use plaster to heal fractures in various conditions, especially in women and small children, because it is not too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of plaster to heal fractures and dislocations and twists: take 3 parts of lard and ladani and elecampane and assafetida and gum arabic and mastic, each at 10 parts; myrrh and aloe, each at 5 parts; and aloes, at 8 parts. Grind them to powder and mix with egg white; if the person's complexion is hot, use this plaster, for it has a good composition and heals broken bones quickly, and it benefits many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of plaster that is good for twists: take myrrh and balsam, each 10 drams; mastic and aloe, each 9 drams; acacia gum 6 drams; Armenian bole 10 drams, and grind well, and mix with water or a lot of egg, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method of plaster for joints and bones separated from their places, and it eases the resulting pain, and treats the fracture: take new linen, and soak it in vinegar and cooked oil, and apply it to the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not restore, but it is good for soothing a hot abscess, and it removes pain cleanly.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of plaster that heals broken bones: take dry fig leaves and ground ivy leaves and grind them together to make a plaster.Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut as dislocation, et restoure le leu: pren mugat et vismalve, ana  .x.   ; mirre et aloes, ana  .viii.  ; acaice vi.  ; bolic armenic x.  , et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of plaster to restore the fracture of the bone, and to reduce the remaining abscess: take new linen, and soak it in vinegar and cooked oil, and apply it to the affected area.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take the root of marshmallow, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, each one part; and grind them, and cook in wine, and if the member is scalded, cook it with moist coriander water, or water, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another stronger method of plaster, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member.Take the juice of leeks and onions, and mix with vinegar, and apply it to the affected area until restored.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take the roots of viscum album, and the seed of flax, ballota, melilotus, and sansontia, and flowers of violets and chamomile, each one part; and crush, and cook in salted water, or fresh water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hyposurgeon writes in his book that one should not put anything on a broken limb to heal it except for a cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and that it should be between soft and too hard.Et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs. Et s’il adveint qu’il soit trop sec, metez y oile; et s’il est trop moli, metez y cire; et si la brisure est grande, qu’on ne puet restorer, qu’on fasse cerote de cire et d’oile, et qu’on le broie tres fins, et qu’on y mette poudres d’armonie et de sante, et de violete, et qu’on le met sus la brisure, et qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen says that one should put on the broken limb, for healing, dry things that are slightly warm, such as myrrh, aloe, incense, and similar things, as we have said.Et dist galien qu’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit. Et s’il adveint que la brisure soit granz et profont, dist galien qu’on doit mettre sus la brisure cerote de cire et d’oile, et qu’on le broie tres fins, et qu’on y mette poudres d’armonie et de sante, et de violete, et qu’on le met sus la brisure.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of ointment that is good for injury and pain: take mugwort and human hair, or bird feathers, and tallow, and mix them together, and grind them, and make an ointment out of it and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then loosen it a little after, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, or that the bone has moved from its place; if not, loosen it by hand every few days. And if pain comes to the site, or itching, without rest or swelling, hurry and loosen it, and remove the plaster immediately; and take a light cloth, and a sponge of sea-moistened, and dip into water, and lift the site until the itching stops, and the pain is soothed; then let the member rest for an hour, then place on wet linen, moistened in water or rose oil, and apply it to a nut, until you are sure of hot abscess; and let the inflammation of the affected member subside, and the pain be removed, then start the binding again subtly, and a little of the plaster, and do not pull it as tightly as before; and subtly until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is closed and red and painful and swollen all over, and you need ointment and bandages, then resume it, just as you did at first.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if nothing of what we have said comes to the limb, do not dislodge it for three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes leave it twenty days, according to what one sees, until the fracture is healed and the bone approaches the skin above; then restrain it more than before, and increase its meat as I have said before; and if you see the place drier than necessary, know that nourishment cannot come there; wet it therefore with warm water every time you dislodge it, and do this every third day, and loosen a little the bandage; thus nourishment comes to the limb by this work, and gently mend what the foolish doctor does, who restores the limb crookedly: this is bad practice, and it only causes wearying and doing it properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of the various methods of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many types of fractures, with diverse appearances, and their causes differ. For there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, and the neck bone is broken all the way to the sinew which is under the bone, as with an axe or a club; and this type of fracture is called "axe fracture".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword strikes the bone without penetrating, and is called this type of fracture  "absolute"; and there are great or small wounds from these two fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a strike with the flat of the sword, or a cut, or from the collar bone, or from falling on stone, or from other similar causes.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a fracture that penetrates, which approaches the membrane beneath the bone, or is on top of the bone; this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is in the bone as thin as a hair, and the crack is small, and because of this, such a fracture is called  "capillary"; and if the wound is made by stone or by falling, or in a similar way, and drives the bone piece inward, and the place is shaved like the blacksmiths when they work on kettles; then the stone goes inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more often to those who have moist bones in their heads, like the head of a child; and this happens with all types of fractures when small pieces are dislodged, as with tiles; I will speak about this later.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all kinds of fractures by their deformity, and by the inquiry into the tent, and by the corruption of the flesh that is above it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hairline fracture is known because when the bone is uncovered and rubbed on top, the fracture appears black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, pay attention to the accidents of the illness; and if you see no malicious accident, such as vomiting of phlegm, loss of consciousness, extension, paralysis, fever, eyes popping out and turning red, and other similar things in various dispositions, then it can heal without a doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you see no shocking accident, and you expect recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the baby comes to you first, and it is in winter, you should remove the foreskin before the fourteenth day when you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the summer, you should hasten to remove the foreskin before the seventh day, so that the skin under the foreskin does not become corrupted, and so that the accidents we have mentioned do not occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone comes just to the membrane that covers the brain, then you should split the fractured part thus: and it is that you grasp the head of the wounded person, and expose the bone in every way you can, and over the wound more gently than you can, and if bleeding occurs when exposing the bone, or a swollen abscess, use the aid that is appropriate; and fill the area with moistened cloth in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the swollen abscesses are soothed, and be sure of the bleeding; then begin around the bone to remove it, and this is done according to two ways of working: one way is that you saw closely in front, and this is the shape:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another cut larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is to have various cuts, some narrow and some wide, with points, made of iron. Work gently so you do not hurt the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is thick and hard, you must pierce around it, so that you use cuts with chisels, not so deep that they go through the bone into the brain; and you must have a margin or circle above the point to prevent the tip from going through the bone. You should have several of these, so that each one comes in its turn to the thickness of the bone, and you should have chisels for all parts of the skull. And there are three ways to make these chisels:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities for piercing around the broken bone are that you place .i. probe on the bone and move your hand back and forth until you feel the bone is pierced; then move the probe elsewhere a little later, and do the same all around. Then cut into the space between the perforations with an incision, doing this as subtly and lightly as you can, as we have said, until you draw out the bone by hand or with one of your instruments, such as tongs or tweezers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sinus.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and cut the bone, it is appropriate that you remove the sharpness which is remained in the bone with any other similar instrument like a chisel, but it should be more slender and more subtle than the other chisel; and if anything of the small bones or scales remains, then remove them lightly with the instruments; then treat the wound as we have said with tenting and ointments.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of treatment is that which Galen describes, which is much safer; and he highly praises it, and his word is final.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	First, you must uncover a part of the bone where the fracture is open and moving. Once you have uncovered that part, place under it the cutting edge of this lens-shaped instrument, which is its shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, and the part is sore on both sides, so that the incision is towards the bone; then tap with a small mallet, so that you gently hit the bone all around, and be careful of the membrane that is underneath; if it clings to the bone, loosen it gently, for the bone can be loosened without harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture does not penetrate through to the membrane, and the bone is cut only slightly from above, with small pieces, then one must remove this roughness, and take away the scales with a very fine rasp of which you should have various sizes, in order to smooth each part according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you use a large razor at first, and then a finer one afterwards, and do not stop doing this until it is done well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair-cutting and subtlety techniques, you should apply it according to its purpose; and this is something that has not yet been answered for those who have dedicated their studies to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the sinus is exposed, you should take a piece of linen according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it over the wound; then take another piece of double linen, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first piece; and do this as gently as you can so that you do not burden the sinus, then administer a bandage on top, without tightening it more than is necessary to hold the wound; and leave it for one or two days, until the abscesses are relieved, then loosen it, and apply medicine such as roots of lilies, and flour of vetches, and incense powder, and aristologus, and similar things; and make a powder from these things, and place it on the wound, and apply mild medicines without biting; and ensure that the wound is clean, so that you do not leave any ointment, or allow any pus to gather, for when pus gathers on the membrane of the brain, it hardens and pierces, causing great harm to the patient; for when one applies something biting to the sinus, it heals from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care therefore, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, that it is without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if darkness does not come except through the medicine that one has placed on it, how virtuous it is, then you should take a portion of honey and three parts of rose oil, and glue one piece of cloth, and place it on the ulcer; then heal it in ways that are appropriate, until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose are broken, or one part alone, for they are two bones; and beneath is cartilage, which does not break but only bends or twists, then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should boil your little finger or toe, and put the break inside your index finger or toe evenly, and in the pocket by force, until the nail returns according to its natural shape; and do this lightly, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	If the fracture is above the nose, and the bones cannot be aligned, then you must place it evenly at the end of a rather thick thread.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is in two parts, do this again, and try to restore it on the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscesses are healed, then boil a tent of linen cloth at the tip of the nail, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you attach one to another part, if the fracture is there; and the tents should be so thick that they fill the holes in the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some restorers say that one must moisten the tents with butter, and change them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I do not think that this is good, but one should moisten them in a mixture of egg white and mill dust; then leave the tent, as long as the bone is broken, and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes they put in goose feathers instead of tents, and wrap around with a thin cloth, and keep the fracture still, and the patient breathes among them; now do what you wish.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if hot abscesses come to the nose while you are working on it, then put cerate or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in a little diaquilon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes from it, then use a poultice of flour of sesame, and incense powder, cooked with egg white, then put over light gauze and do not bind it with anything; and if the fracture in the nail is small, and it is broken into small pieces, so remove it by means of suitable instruments for this, then clean the wound and heal it with healing ointments, and if there is no wound inside the nail, then cure it with tents and put splinters of black alder in it until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	of a broken jaw:
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is broken underneath and there is no open wound, and the break is only on the surface and not broken in two, one can know it easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the fracture is in the right side, for you to put your right index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is in the left jaw, then put your right index finger of the right hand, and put the fracture inside gently, and make it equal with the other hand by force.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is displaced in .ii., then you must administer an extension of .i. parts, so that it is equalized.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement of the teeth, or chipping, then they must be restrained with a wire of gold, silver, or silk; then put cerotum on the broken jaw, and place a .i. double drape on it; and place upon the drape a large well-made splint, or a piece of leather equal in size, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it onto the mouth as tightly as you can, and instruct the patient to rest and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the jaw is changing shape, then loosen it on the third day and then reset it to its original state; and place cerotum upon it again, of the powder from the mill with egg white or flour of sisament, after you have removed the previous cerotum; and place over the cerotum a light lining, and if the linings become sore, and the condition of the patient does not change, leave it as long as it takes to heal; many times it heals within 3 weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if a hot abscess comes, then administer what we have said many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, examine to see if any piece of bone has been dislodged; then remove it skillfully with suitable instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, dilate it with flame according to your necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and there remains none, then close the wound, if it is wide, and place upon it suitable poultices to promote healing.
de la forcele	of the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forceps breaks in several ways in front of the shoulder, and the break occurs in 3 ways: it can be broken and dislocated in two parts, which is the easiest to restore; or there can be a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the operation is as follows when the break is without a wound: you need two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder where the forceps is broken; and the other extends the neck towards the affected part; then with your fingers, put the broken pieces back into alignment, so that the joint is in the correct position, with no misalignment or displacement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend it further, place a round pillow of cloth or linen underneath the shoulder, and make it as thick as necessary; then raise the forceps and hold the pillow in your hand, so that you put the broken pieces back into alignment, as they should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull out the head of the dislocated shoulder, because it comes up very tightly, then the patient should lie on his back, and put something under the shoulder, an ear, and the assistant pushes the shoulder down while pulling the arm upward, until the bone of the shoulder is dislodged.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then you must feel for the fracture with your fingers, and if it is stuck, then you must split it open; and gently pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined due to swelling, then apply this instrument under the shoulder to draw out the fluid.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	It should have the shape of a spoon, and not be hollowed out, and be as wide as is appropriate according to the size of the bone and the extent of the work; and it should have two handles, as you can see, and one should be wide, and the other narrow, according to the opening of the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are certain about the hot abscess, cut open the wound, and if the opening is small, or if you doubt about a hot abscess, then close up the wound with bandages and tenting, according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses appear, moisten a cloth in rose oil and garlic and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The dislocation of the bone, when there is no wound or fracture, is to place upon the bone the poultice made of mill-dust and egg white, and put light sponges on top, and place a sphere underneath the axilla, if you need it; then take a very broad band, one palm wide, then place a folded cloth on top of the sponges and the poultice; then take a slender staff, three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the band so that the head of the band hangs down; and place the staff upon the fracture, and wind the band around the neck, and underneath the sound axilla, and under the injured axilla; and adjust it from each side, and when you see that the ligament holds the fracture properly, and you clearly see that the staff does not move on top of the broken bone, then reward it every day, and when the ligature loosens, then restrain it; and let the patient lie on his back, and when he sleeps, put a small pillow underneath the axilla to raise the shoulder; thus the fracture will be lightened by the strengthening of the shoulder joint, or you can bind his arm to his neck, and do not release him if an evil accident does not occur, up to twenty days; then recommence the poultice, if you see that he needs it, and adjust it thus, until he is healed; and he is usually healed within 28 days, but some men heal more quickly.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Then it happens that the shoulder is broken or dislocated in a large place or in the middle, and one does not feel it except by touch; then apply the apparatus according to the shape of the fracture, and reset it according to its natural form, in every way you can; then put flour from the mill with an abundance of eggs over the site, and light compresses, and place a double cloth over that; then place a broad, thin board over it, a little wider than the shoulder, and if there is any swelling underneath the board on the shoulder, fill that indentation with compresses of linen so that the board lies flat; then tighten it with a large bandage firmly so that the board does not move from its place, and check the binding every day; and every time it loosens, tighten it again, and adjust the board if it has moved out of place, and let the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder is restored in 20 or 25 days. And when this number of days is complete, loosen it, and be careful, for it is not a bone that sets easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a part of the bone protrudes forward, and not beneath the heart, they should push it up, and the bone, and do as we said in the breaking of the forceps to soothe the hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The leg is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; it often breaks at the knee.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it bends downward, and the patient feels great pain and weakness throughout his body, and sometimes vomits blood, and there are open wounds in the broken bone, which he feels with his fingers.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that the patient lies on his back, and places a cushion between his shoulders, then presses his shoulders together, and joins the ribs with his hands, ensuring that the bone is set correctly in all ways; then applies plasters and bandages over the wound below, using a subtle mixture of salt or other light substance, and wraps it in a cloth, placing it over the broken bone so that it does not move; then he winds the bandage around the body, and tightens it gently, and checks every hour if it has loosened, and if it has, he tightens it; and if it needs to be removed due to corrosion or itching or pain or abscess, he should hurry and remove it, cleaning what has come from the wound in various ways of treatment; then he reapplies the plaster and tightens it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the fracture of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that rib fractures only occur in the large ones near the back, and in the chest near the head, and they only bend because they are slippery; and one can tell [this] well through examination of the two sides.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatment is to set the break evenly, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply the ointment, and bind it with a cloth, if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the rib fracture is declining towards the interior, then the patient feels great pain and stabbing, as with pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane; and also has a cough, and coughs up a large quantity of blood, and it is a serious illness, and the ancients placed great importance on it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that one should administer foods that swell the belly, to push the fracture out.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, unless hot abscesses come to it, if they have not come to it already.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come to it, then heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some say that one should put cupping glasses on the area to draw out the excess fluids, and this is reasonable; however, there is a risk that the cupping glass will attract the excess fluids due to the weakness of the body.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some say that one should cover the area with soft lamb's wool soaked in hot oil, and place a tent between the ribs to ensure even pressure all around, then it should be bandaged with bandages of pleurisy, meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain where the bone breaks through the bandage, and there is doubt about the patient, then one should cut above the broken rib, and place an instrument to ward off the saphena vein; then one must split the bone, and gently pull it out, and then sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat it with ointments until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a painful abscess comes, place wet cloth in rose oil, and apply it to the affected area; and treat the area around the abscess as needed, and let the patient lie on their side where it is, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	from the fracture of the neck:
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes there is a fracture in the bones of the neck, and it can be bent; and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will recover or not, take note if their hands are soft and swollen and numb, and they cannot move or straighten them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is deadly in many ways, and if they are numb and feel pain when you stretch or pinch them, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the illness is healed, if proper care is given.And si li mains ne sont pas mollifiiez ne enflees ne mortes, et les sent bien quant on les estraint, sache que li maux est de la chair ou de la peau et qu’il n’est pas de l’os; et si tu le mets en cure, il sera sain.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar condition occurs in the spine of the back, and you want to know whether it is healthy or not, then take note if the feet are swollen, and if the symptoms are present which are in the hands, and in the back there is flatulence and defecation without volition; and when he has been placed on his stomach, there is also defecation without volition.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is placed on his back and he wants to sit up, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is mortal; do not labor in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if these effects do not occur, then the condition is less severe.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if there is an abscess, apply warm rose oil or hen's egg oil to the spine until it is soothed; then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bandage it with a linen cloth; and command the patient to rest, and not sleep on the painful side until he is cured.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is dislocated, you should cover it with the heart; and take out the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch, then treat the wound with ointment mixed with chalk, until it heals; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the 'head of the cow', fill your poultice-bag with your left hand, and place it equally in your other hand at your will, then apply the plaster and the bandage on top of it, if you need to; then tie it tightly, and if there is a bone dislocated, do the same, take it out, and treat the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It sometimes happens that the hip bone is fractured, and if it does, there will be a slight depression at the head; and they feel long and inclined to one side, and the patient feels pain in the area, and there is tenderness and swelling where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And its restoration is that you extend your hand over it, so that you are on the break; and know which is the upper and lower part of the fracture; and if the fracture is only at the head, then place that fracture evenly, so that it is in its natural shape.Et se ele est au bas, si doit estre sous, et se ele est a l’un costé, si doit estre sous, et ne doit pas estre sur le chief, tant qu’ele soit sanée; car celi qui sont desous doivent estrendre cele qui sont sus, et non pas contrer.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	If the fracture is long, or if it slopes downward, have the patient lie on his stomach until the healing of that fracture is prepared for.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it straight, put on the poultice, then put on a splint of wood or of horn, and hold the fracture so that it does not move; and apply the bandage below the ribs, until the limb is set straight.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side, or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if painful bumps arise, do not touch them until the painful bumps are soothed, and apply what we have mentioned before; then return to the healing, and hold it as it should be, if there is no bad occurrence; and that is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The adjutoires is that which is between the neck and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one should restore it according to either of two methods; one of which is to take a rod of medium thickness, in this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Tie the two ends with cords and raise them up high, and have the patient sit on a seat; then let him hang his broken arm over the rod, until it comes to rest, and hold in place with a bend in the rod; then have him lie down on something heavy so that another person can stretch the arm downward; then have the helper place the dislocation back into alignment with their hands together, until it is as it should be.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is to have the patient lean on his elbow, and tie his hand to his neck; then have one minister hold what is above the dislocation in their hands, and the other minister hold beneath the dislocation, at each end of the rod, and stretch each end in opposite directions.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you want the extraction to be more thorough, then tighten the ligature below the fracture, and above it as well, and each assistant must do their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is close to the head of the shoulder, then you should place one ligature in the middle below the joint, and another towards the neck, under the fracture; and likewise, if the fracture is towards the neck, then a light ligature should be placed gently, without exertion, so that the fracture remains even on the joint, and above the neck; then make the fracture even as it should be, and tighten it, if no abscesses form.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if warm abscesses come, then do not compress it until the 7th day, and put soft lamb's wool in oil of roses on the warm abscesses, until they are relieved; then compress, and the way to compress is that you put the plaster on the fracture, then assemble the arm above the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put the bandage, and compress on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in place of stars, if nothing deflects it, or if the bone is not displaced.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone is displaced, then use stars, and put a larger and stronger star on the fracture, and have between each star 1 finger of space, and let each star be as large that it passes the fracture by 3 fingers on each side; then compress over the stars, thus as I said at the beginning of the chapter, over the fracture, more strongly and less by moving away.Et si li briseure est vers le coute, si covient que tu mettes la main sus l’espaule, et l’autre main sus lou col, et use d’esteles plus forts sus lou bras, et sus l’ajutoire, ou se li os est brisez; puis estrain sus les esteles, en alant devers le chief, et que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the position of the stars, and the tightening, as we have said, at the time that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the hot abscess, let it be bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine the ligature every three days, so that itching or swelling does not come to the site, or the growth of the infection may not come to the member because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the abscess, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents occur, do not loosen the ligature until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach; and place under the shoulder a pillow filled with wool of equal thickness, and examine every hour during the day or night that the figure of the broken member does not move, or the ligature become softened; then let the abscess heal by the power of medicine, and give him the food that we have previously mentioned, in such a way that the food is most subtle at first; and when he begins to recover, let the food be thicker.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to be bound for forty days all around, and then one must release them and administer baths and ointment medicines to direct the place.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the dislocation is severe and stuck, it remains to be released for 50 days or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the breaking of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the 'ulna', one of which is small, and it follows the armpit; and the other is large, and it is located under the little finger towards the hand; sometimes only the large ulna breaks, or the small one, and sometimes both.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, their restoration is easier and healing faster; but when the larger ones are broken, healing is more difficult and painful than when they are both broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only a small bone that is broken, then one must extend it slightly and put it in place.And if a large bone is broken, one should not extend it too much, but put it in its place with a little extension.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is a large bone, one should apply greater force to it; and let him lie on his back, and let the wounded arm be higher than the other, and the little finger lower than all the others, and let the patient cross himself over himself, and let there be a pillow in front of him so that he feels no pain; then let one minister extend his upper arm towards his hand, or to the elbow, and another minister above that.And let them hold it tightly for a little while until they feel the bone enter its place; then they must release it immediately and put on the poultice quickly.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then put the bandages on evenly, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the bone has broken into pieces, place each one in its proper position; and if any have become dislocated, and you cannot restore them to their places, then cut through the bone, as we have described earlier.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it specifically in this chapter; so take the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of the treatment hot abscesses appear, glue a bandage of cerate made of rose oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft; and then gently lay the bandage on top, so that the hot abscesses are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the cerate, and apply the plaster made from mill-powder with an egg, and then put on the bandages, and let the bandage over the fracture be a bit stronger, and a little larger than the others; and you should have six bandages on the arm in various positions: whether the fracture is in one bone or two; and tighten more over the fracture than elsewhere, and at all times less as it heals, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages over the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and let the thread by which it is tightened be made of flax, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And re-examine the limb and the joint after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if some bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you should wet the limb with warm water until the itch is relieved; and let the limb not be tightly bound but at rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then renew the binding, and if the ligaments are relaxed and the bones dislocated, and similar things, then correct it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if one must guard against the nutrients not being able to reach the member because it is too bound up, then one must loosen it a little and leave it thus for some days, until the nutrients flow to it, and then bind it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said happens to the patient, then do not loosen it for 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Or if he can move his neck without pain, then he may use his hands to support his neck, and keep his neck straight, and guard against movement and effort, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is healed in 30 or 35 days, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that in the back of the hand and on the fingers there are few fractures, and they only come from many foldings.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or folded, then the patient should bend his hand, and keep it straight in front of him evenly; then he should put his hand on the stretched cloth, and stretch the broken bones, and put them together evenly, and then apply the plaster and poultices, if there are no abscesses, and then put on a splint according to the amount of the break; and let it be wrapped in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is in the peritoneum around the abdomen of the plant, make a sponge, and instruct the patient to squeeze it at the site of the broken plant; then squeeze it with a long strip of cloth, and let the mark of the burn be as large as the palm of the hand, and squeeze it as it should be.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the forearm, you must put a splint on top and another underneath the plant, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it all around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture is in any of the fingers, if it is the thumb, put it in a cast, as it should be; and squeeze it with the palm, and see if you put a small straight splint to raise the fracture, and do not move it; and if the fracture is in one of the other fingers, like the index finger or one of the others, put it in a cast, and bind it with the healthy finger that is next to it; either tie them all together while holding them, or put a splint on top, as in the thumb; take care with the healing and the preparation of a hot abscess, and treat any pus that comes out, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The thighbone is often broken, and one can see it well when it turns forward and backward; its restoration is by binding with a ligature above the fracture, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then each assistant stretches their band to their side equally; and this is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, let one ligature be towards the armpit, and the other ligatures below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is close to the knee, then let the ligature be beyond the knee, and let the extension be below; then put the mirror to the bone equal to its natural shape with his two hands, until it is level, and then apply the poultice and the bandage, and if no abscess forms.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside first and then return to your work and treatment; the bandage is done in this way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	You should wrap the fracture with a long bandage doubled in two or three layers, and leave the excess, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the buttock, and tie the long thread between the thigh and the leg beyond the knee below, and let the ends of the thread come above; then go up the leg and the thigh with the bandage, then put splints on the fracture, and put a splint on the bone of the leg; then tighten the space between the leg and the thigh with soft rags to make it equal, then start to tie three turns or four above the fracture; and the more you go above the fracture, the less you tighten; then grasp the two ends of the thread that you have tied between the leg and the thigh, and tie three splints that are above, then go back below to the end of the thread, so that you come under the foot; and tighten it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that no abscess or swelling or other similar thing comes.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if anything happens to it, then loosen it and address whatever arises, as we have said many times before; and if there is a bone splinter that pokes out, it should be removed, if possible; and if not, then the area should be split open and the wound cleansed, as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thigh is broken in this way with splints, as in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, the malady is not cured by this method of restoration.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And you shall know that the neck is restored in one day, or a little less or more, according to the variety of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the fold of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the bend of the knee there is little breaking, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, then there is only a crack or an opening, and it happens to everyone, with or without pain, and it feels good to all.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is to put something equal to what is torn from his fingers, as long as it can be reassembled; then put on the plaster, and if necessary, put a round bandage, and adjust it as needed; then follow all the instructions we have given for other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar things; then put on whatever is needed for each accident, until he is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called the "mussel" and the other the "foscile." The same injuries and breaks occur as in the arm, and its treatment is therefore the same. If both bones are broken at the same time, then the leg is completely useless.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if only the small bones are broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, then there is great pain and it can be seen, and it goes under.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Therefore, apply extension and put it back in place, and tie the splints evenly; but if the break is severe and there are multiple pieces, then the extension should be lighter and less forceful, and adjust according to your skill.Et s’il est en perille de mort par la brisure, si covient qu’on le traie a la vie et li mettretes de l’huile sur la brisure, et li esteles li ligiet les membres; et il n’est pas a grant resceve, s’il ne tornast en perille de mort.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have finished your work, take two wooden splints that prop up the leg on both sides, and let them be as long as the leg from the knee to below; then wrap two bands around it above and below, and tie it in the middle, and at this time the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and so it is well; and some administer a board as long as the leg, and they put the leg on it to prevent movement, and properly they apply it in the break where there is injury; and move the leg each day, to see if there is a hot abscess or any other accident; and treat it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the break of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no break, but sometimes there is a break in the bones of the foot and in both feet, and there is only bruising in various ways.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	If it happens that the bones of the foot are broken and you see the bones protruding, then put the sore foot on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, and then put your foot on his, where the bones are protruding, then press down until they return to their places; then apply the ointment and bandages on top, and under the belly of the foot place a small wooden board that is two fingers wide, then bind it to the foot in the proper way, then wrap it with clothes and other things as needed.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And after three or four days have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find that the bones are healed, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if one or both of the toes are broken, set them as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place a splint on the broken toe according to its length, and let it be slightly wider, then place under the foot that wooden board which I mentioned earlier, and bind it in place; and if there are one or two, or more, broken toes, place a splint on each toe according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and tighten the board underneath the foot; and let the top of the board press firmly against the belly of the foot.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, from which we have spoken; and treat each case as it should be treated.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone of the finger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bones of a woman are broken, make her sit with her back bent, and hold her from behind; then fill the wound with cotton, and put in as much as can fit; then make the woman stand up, and move her back little by little, and the cotton will jump out, until it reaches the entrance of the wound, and the bones will return to their place with the cotton; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished, put it back in, and do this for seven days around the wound: the break will be restored. If you wish, take a goat's bladder, tie a cane to its opening, and blow into the cane, inflating the bladder inside: the wound will return to its place; then fill it with cotton, and leave it like that for a few days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the man's or woman's elbow is broken, restore it as we have said for the bone of the hip; and these breaks are not hidden from him who applies his study and skill, and understands my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the break indicates in many ways the right way to restore it: understand this therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	When the penis is broken, take a goose's gullet and insert it into the penis; then wrap cloth around it, and leave it for three days or so, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with wound, especially if it is large, such as the thigh or shoulder bone or similar, that he be bled immediately, in accordance with the bleeding we have described earlier.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound bleeds, then add vitriol again, if you have nothing else; then reset the fracture in that same hour or day, if no abscesses form.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses form, then wait until the third day to reset the fracture, as long as the abscesses are subsiding; do not touch them on the second or fourth day, for you would cause a dangerous accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible beneath the uncovered chest, you should gently place it in its proper position with your hands, with a slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not apparent to you in placing it evenly by hand, then reset it with this instrument made of iron which is seven or eight inches long, and its width depends on the size of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary that the surgeon has three or four, depending on how many he needs for each treatment of a fracture; and let it be round and slightly thick so that it does not bend under pressure during your work on the limb, and let it be thin at the end, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called «palainche», because the curved head of the bone should be placed upon the visible end of the bone; and it is bound once, so that it may return and be even with the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is small and the instrument cannot well grasp the bone, you must pare the head of the bone so that the instrument can hold it firmly.Et se li os ne vout point demorer a son leu, si convint que tu l’estrenges tant qu’il soit en son leu et en sa possance; car en ce cas ne peuit li membres valer.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then cut it with an appropriate instrument, either an incision or a saw, to your ability; then remove what remains in the bone of sharp points and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And you should do so until it is in its place, then soak the cloth in black wine, and wring it out properly if it is stained; and do not put cerate or anything else on the wound that would cause pus and corruption to arise; then administer the ointment once you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the surrounding area according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not restricted by the bandage; and many times this has caused harm to the patient, even death or corrosion on occasion. The constriction should be gentler than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is severe or large, and you doubt that an ill accident will come of it as we have said, and you feel pain in the area, then you should not use ointment; but wrap around, instead of ointment, hard cloths, and tie them on.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound is puffed up, then remove what you have put on it and apply healing ointment, such as tetrapharmacon and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you should loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is healed and closed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary for the limb to be prepared in such a way that the bowstring runs downhill easily.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they remain for many days, and it cannot be souded but keeps returning apart, know that there are small pieces of bone causing this, so you should probe the wound with a probe and remove all these displaced pieces that cause the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the surface, or any other kind of corruption, then you should treat it according to what he said in his chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, such as in the thigh or shoulder, and similar large limbs, do not treat it at all, for many die from it, but leave it alone until it drains; perhaps it will drain in 20 or 30 days, then cure the wound if you can; if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of bruises that come after healing:
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come across dislocation after a fracture, especially when it is near a joint, and the sight of the limb's deformed shape is unpleasant; and sometimes the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take heed, therefore, that the physician gives him styptic medicines such as aloe, incense, myrrh, sarcocolla, and similar others; or you can powder any of these things, or all together, and confit them with wine, egg white, or garlic; and apply it to the joint in a poultice, pressing it on well and not removing it for several days. Then remove it and start again, repeating this until the nodule is removed. Or you can apply a piece of plaster, well-prepared so that it removes all inflammation from the limb. If the nodule has turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, cut it away and expose the superfluity; or have it cut away by a surgeon, once it is removed, treat the wound until it heals.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb which is weakened after the healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is healed and the limb remains weak and thin, this happens for many reasons: one is because it was bound too tightly and not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, and the nutrients could not reach the limb; or due to excessive swelling; or due to too much movement, and not at the right time; or because there is a lack of blood in his body, and he is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you feed the patient and make the body tender so that the blood multiplies in him; and administer a bath to him, and give him joy and amusement; then apply pitch to the limb so that the pitch attracts the great swelling, and wash it often with warm water until the swelling goes down into the limb; and restore it to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	until the limb is straightened after recovery
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is crooked after recovery and the bone is broken open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function; so do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb completely anew, and many fools have indeed done this in our land; and these actions are blamed, and great harm and even death may come from them; nevertheless, if the dislocations and torture are fresh, they should be washed with hot water, or herbs that soften should be boiled, such as leaves of marsh-mallow, and roots, and mallows, and similar medicines that soften the swelling. You also make a softening ointment, such as well-prepared diaquilon, and you take the mucilage of marsh-mallow and mix it with lamb’s fat or olive oil, and apply it to the area; or you take fattened figs and grind them with cow manure, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the joint is dislocated by constantly rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And movement must be applied to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is awake and hardened like stone, and it needs to be removed with iron, then one must cut it up to the bone, with a subtle and light incision; and apply poultice and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs in someone, one should immediately bring it back into alignment without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one is late in treating it, the area will swell and sometimes it will be reset in place; therefore, one should not move it at the hour when it is swollen; often this brings on spasm and other pains; nevertheless, when this happens, let the patient be bled, then left alone until the abscesses are drained; afterwards, apply warm water and oil to the affected area, then gently reset the dislocation, and treat each part as the healing progresses.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocation from the head to the feet.
des mandibules	of the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Then it happens that the jaws are dislocated sideways and the dislocations of both are according to two methods: either they are a little moved from their place and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated and hang down towards the feet, and saliva flows from his mouth which he cannot hold back nor close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped around with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself in various ways.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is complete and accomplished, then you must reset it quickly without delay; and in such a way that the assistant grabs the head of the patient, and inserts his finger from one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and let the other fingers be relaxed in order to apply pressure evenly; and instruct the patient to soften their jaws and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And he holds the mirror steady, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if they are stuck, especially if both jaws are together, then apply hot water and oil, until they reset gently; do not try to force the reset as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back into alignment and the mouth of the patient is closed well without softening, then place wet towels made of rose oil and wax on it, then bind it lightly with soft ligatures; and let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be supported between two cushions so that he may not move to the right or left, nor make any effort to talk, but take light food, until the pains are relieved, and the jaw is bound and healed. And then let him eat lightly what he wishes, and do not exert himself to open his mouth to eat and drink until the jaw is well bound and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be put back into place within an hour, and are not converted to their place, then fever and usual sodden come, and sometimes stomach problems, and sometimes vomiting of clear fluid.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is disastrous; and often the person to whom this happens dies within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The shoulder joint cannot be dislocated from within the chest or armpit; it is sometimes dislocated by force, and one feels it strongly.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then press the dislocated area firmly with your palm, and it will return to its place; then apply the ointment and bandage, and tighten it; and the shoulder joint near the neck cannot be dislocated; if it does, and it dislocates again at some point, reset it to its place as we have said; then apply the ointment and bandage, and tighten it, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed; and in the same way the shoulder is reset when it has become dislocated from its socket.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: one way is that it dislocates on the side of the armpit below; and the second is on the side of the arm; and sometimes it dislocates above, but this rarely happens; and it does not dislocate behind or inside for the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inside for the nerves; and often it dislocates below towards the armpit, especially in those who have little flesh, because in them it dislocates easily; but in those who have enough flesh, it dislocates with difficulty, and goes back in with difficulty.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men that they get a concussion or fracture, and the shoulder swells from a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of that.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Then you must test it until you are certain, and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And you will recognize the dislocation when it is towards the armpit, and there will be a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a manifest diversity between them; and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and below the armpit at the top of the shoulder, as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move in any way; and likewise, if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you will see it clearly at the touch; and this manner of dislocation is not difficult to reset when it is new, or when the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the minister lifts the affected hand up high, then places his fingers under the shoulder, and lifts the joint with force upward to its place; and the minister lifts the hand, and extends it upward, then brings it down; this will work quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and they should be given soothing and softening remedies, such as a decoction of alder and fenugreek and mallow in water, and they should be attended to. Then the patient should be laid on their back, and under the shoulder a pad of wool that is neither too soft nor too hard should be placed, then the minister places their heel on the pad, and lifts the top of the shoulder gently, and pulls the hand of the affected side; and another minister holds the head of the affected side so that it does not move downward. The shoulder will return immediately, and if you see that it is not returning, do this according to this method: and make sure that a man who is taller than the patient is present; he should stand straight against their chest, and push his shoulder under the armpit of the affected side, and lift up the armpit so that the patient hangs in the air; and another minister pulls the hand of the affected side downward toward the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	If the dislocation is too slight, one can weigh it down with something heavy, and it will return immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And one can also reset it in another way: one inserts a long iron rod into the ground so that the shoulder is as warm as the pistol, neither too hot nor too cold; then it is placed under the patient, but with a cotton cloth on top, and the patient stands upright; then his hand is extended downward on the other side, and the joint will return to its place suddenly; and if it does not return due to all these things we have said, then perform this treatment: take an iron rod two arms long and four fingers wide, which has a curved tip to fit into the socket according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then tie it to the top of the stick with soft cloth so that the stick does not strike the patient; then place the stick under the joint of the patient; and extend his arm over the stick, and tie the shoulder to the stick, and the arm to the head of the hand; then place the arm on a small log, and extend the hand downward, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, however it may be, you should place under the joint a round pillow of wool, then apply the plaster prepared from flour with incense and egg white over the entire shoulder and around it; then tighten it under the joint gradually, and tie the string over the plaster, and embrace the hand to his neck, and let the hand remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he eats little, as long as the member is conforted, because it will heal faster; and then eat more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is stiff and not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has moved out of place due to moisture or any other cause, you should administer cautery at three places, as described in the chapter on cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates after 7 days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot lift his arm upstream, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint was never set in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation which is towards the feet, and the breasts, or behind, is made by pushing and stretching with the hands, and one administers it elsewhere; and treat it until it is healed.Li dislocation qui est devers lou chief, ou en haut, si est faite par traction; et li dislocation qui est entre le col et la tete, si est faite par impulsion.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing the limb becomes swollen and tender to the touch, and with movement, then the patient should use the bath many times until the swelling goes down and the limb returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	on the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You should know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated when it becomes loose and moves easily; and if it is dislocated all around, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not reset, for one can see and feel it clearly; and it becomes dislocated according to its shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick neck with the healthy one, then you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	Because the joint is crooked and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must reset it as soon as any abscess forms, for if an abscess forms, then it will be painful to reset; and by chance it cannot be fully reset all the way, especially when it is at the back; so it is worse than other dislocations, and it causes more pain, and by chance death can come.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it can be reset, that you extend his hand with your two hands; and let his arms be spread out, and his hands bent according to the joint, around, and behind, and push the joint to his shoulders together, or to the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it will return when he bends his hand to his hand, and he stretches from the root of the palm the joint which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, then strongly extend it; and one minister extends the arm and the other holds it so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped a long and wide cloth around it; and when they have joined the joint with their hand, anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then press the joint firmly into place, and when it is in position, apply a dry plaster with egg white, and hold it firmly, and keep the arm pressed against the sick neck for several days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, then loosen the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not healing well, then reapply the plaster and the bandage, and leave it for a few days until it is firmly healed; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	If he feels pain after the joint is reset and it moves, then bathe and rub it gently, and press until the pain subsides; or place a fat sheepskin over the joint, leave it for a day and night, then remove it and have him enter the bath; and when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then replace the sheepskin, and enter the bath again; do this two or three times until he is healed. If you see that, place warm cow dung on it with butter, and hold it in place; it will return to its proper state.
li dislocation de la main	dislocations of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	Healings of the hand are light, more than other joints. Nevertheless, it is necessary to put it back into place gently, in the same hour that it was dislocated, so that the joint becomes swollen or an abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	The reset should be performed by placing the patient's hand on a table, and the helper extends the hand and looks at it to ensure it is straight, then places his palm over the appearance of the joint and pushes until it returns to its place; you must ensure that it is in the right position. Then the patient's hand should be placed palm down on a table for extension and reset.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	If the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then the patient should lie on his back with his hand flat on a table, and the surgeon should place his hand over the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it goes back into place now, that is good. If not, then strain it with soothing plasters, heat the abscesses, and leave it like that without re-enforcing.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot return the joint to its place within a few days, then leave the joint crooked; and do not harm the patient any further than that the hand is weakened, and he cannot squeeze anything at all: therefore know that the nerves are cut, or the artery; there is no other cure except to strain with cautery near the spot, and by chance nothing else will help.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, then apply the plaster that we have mentioned, then hold it and leave it for .v. days, then loosen it and leave it like that.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is any swelling, then moisten it with warm water, and rub it until it heals.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the dislocation is in the fingers on one side, sometimes on the back of the palm or on the underside; therefore hold the finger, and push the joint towards the part where it is dislocated; and keep it there for two days, then make it even that same day; and do not ligature it, as we have said, and loosen it during the day, and make it move, and bind it at night; and do this often, until it is straightened. And do likewise if it is dislocated on the underside of the hand, and do as you did before, until it is healed.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	from the dislocation of the sciatic nerve from the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the sciatic nerve in the back or neck is dislocated, there is no cure, for death hastens the ailment.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the evacuations occur without consent, and he cannot hold them in, and many times a member becomes paralyzed, either both hips or both arms or one; and many times the sciatic nerve becomes paralyzed in four places; that which is paralyzed in the back is called 'gilbositez': the cure is to determine if the gilbositez occurred from childhood: if not, there is no cure or healing for it.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which occurs from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient scholars described in great detail, but it did not bring much benefit; but I have abbreviated it according to my understanding and have devised instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the paralysis that occurs in the feet, there is no healing; and also that which occurs directly on both sides, and cannot be cured except for that which occurs properly in the back, as I said; and it is that the patient be stretched out on his face in one place equally, and have a strap underneath him so that he does not bend; then insert a brand at the head into the ground, and another at the feet, and tie a cord underneath the joints of the paralysis, and another at the hips, and knees, and ankles; and two ministers know the cords, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the brands; and they are well tied, the brand as we have said, and let the minister put his palms on the spine, until it revives.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return with this treatment, take a board three yards long, and dig under the wall, and let the patient lie on his side, and place the end of the board under the wall, then put the middle of the board on the spine; and let the patient put his feet on the other end of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see fit, do it with the pulley that turns by hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And you shall insert two pegs at the head of the patient, one yard long, and towards the feet, two others; and between each peg, above and below, there should be a space of a palm's width; and in each peg, there should be a hole, through which the pulley cord runs, and the pegs are firmly planted in the ground so that they do not move; and between each pair of pegs, there should be a turning peg, on which the cords turn, and on two turning pegs, there should be two small pegs, each a palm's length, for turning the pulley; then tie one cord which is among the pegs to the pulley towards the head, and the other cord towards the feet to the other pulley, and each minister turns their pulley all along the cords, and the master makes the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, then put on a desiccant plaster with plenty of egg white, and then the poultices, and then the cast of a tablet three fingers long, which purple discolors the area of the hunchback and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage, as we have said, and use the patient's subtle numbing medicine until he is healed; and if anything comes in the end of health, then one should administer softening and soothing medicines, with the cast that we have mentioned before; and sometimes they administer a piece of lead, and sometimes the appearance comes in the rear spine of the back, and they think it is dislocation; but it is the bone that protrudes, so one must not presume on this, for it might bring about death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	You should know that dislocations of the hip and shoulder joints only occur due to dislocations, and not as with other joints; and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: inner and outer, front and back; and more internally, and less dislocated in the front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, the sick one is longer, and the sick knee joint more open than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend his knee towards the fire; and the part which is next to it is swollen with a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh bone comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes from disuse, is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him who has it in front, are that his leg is well according to the accomplishment; nevertheless, he does not bend the knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot, and he retains his urine, and the veins swell, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who has it behind, are that he cannot bend or double his knee, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the veins are softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The remedies for this type of dislocation are that you examine whether the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its nature, then there is no treatment; and one must not be presumptuous about it.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for the one whose dislocation is fresh, and there are four types of dislocation, you should quickly turn the joint, and stretch it inwards and outwards, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will return, and will not need further treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this way, you should prepare a strong minister and extend the leg strongly with both hands, or with a bandage tied above the knee; and another minister extends his hand above in such a way that he presses his hands under his buttocks, then tighten a rope around the thigh; and another holds the head with a bandage; and they all stretch upwards and downwards at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground once, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of stretching is common to all four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, you should apply pressure to the affected area. When the dislocation is in the thigh, you should lay the patient on their healthy side, then place a bandage around the root of the thigh, and the part under the armpit; then tighten the bandage towards the armpit and the groin; then another minister grips his arms and squeezes the thick part of the dislocated thigh, and extends it forcefully: it will return to its place immediately. This type of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot pull it in this manner that we have said, then you must tie the patient's two feet together with a strong leather strap above the heels and above the knees; the affected leg should be stretched out two fingers more than the other. Then let him be hung from the end of a pole, about two arm's lengths above the ground; then command a minister to hold the top of the thigh, and another minister hanging with the patient, who holds the thigh firmly, for the joint will now return quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is returned, let the patient lie down as we have said in the one who has gout; and then tighten the strap on the affected leg properly, and on the foot also; then put two torches, one at the head and one at the feet, and insert the torch between the thighs of the patient in the middle; and plant wet cloths around so that it does not scorch the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and let the surgeon hold the dislocation evenly with his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put him on the table and press him as we have said in the gilet [a garment with straps that could be used to restrain a patient], and lay the patient on his healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is forward, you should extend the affected leg slowly, and according to what I have said; and the surgeons should put their weight on the painful angle, then press with the other hand, and they should lean towards the knee.Si li mires ne puet pas le ramerier, qu’il le mette sus la table, et li mires estendent les deux mainz et li deux pids, et l’un des mires met sa main sus li sain costeit et gise li malaides, et li auter met sa main sus la legre malaide et tire vers le bas, et li mires tirent li membres vers lor.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is in the hip, he should not be lowered or lifted from the bed, but should be placed as if his hip were dislocated on one side, as we have said about lying on both hips; and he should lie on his face with the strap stretched as we have said before, and someone should press on the joint while he is on the table; and when the patient stretches his legs and they are even, then adjust the thighs, apply the poultice, and tie it with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and after three or four days, untie him, and apply the poultice again; and if you see that they are even, then bind it as before and leave it for three days; then untie him and let him walk comfortably until his limbs are comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is, inside and outside, and behind; but it should not be dislocated in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not bend at the thigh, you know it is dislocated; and the restoration of all [dislocations] is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his face, and put his foot on your feet; then take his knee in your palms, and pull between your fingers, then bend both sides of the knee firmly; and another minister extends his foot so that the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that it bends well at the thigh lightly; and put the plaster on top, and make the leg bend at the thigh, and let them heal together for three or four days, then loosen it; and the patient should not walk until the limb is healed.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the member is not at all, then administer very strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	Heels are sometimes crushed, and sometimes fully dislocated, both internally and externally.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it hurts in front of the part where it is dislocated: the movements are light, and one must stretch it gently with their hands when it is only dislocated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is dislocated from all sides, you should make the patient stand straight, and grab the leg below the ankle; then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then raise it up, and stretch the foot up well; do this twice as we have said, while pushing and pulling the foot. If it comes back, that's good; if not, repeat the procedure, because it will come back. And if it cannot come back like this, make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and fix the paschal firm in the ground between his buttocks, and tie cloth around it so that he does not bend the patient; then one minister grabs the hip, and another minister stretches the foot with his hands or with a belt to the collar of the foot; then stretch each minister equally, and the paschal will be between the patient's buttocks to hold the patient when they are stretched; then put the mirrors equal to their hands, and another minister grabs the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is at its worst, then apply the plaster and bandages firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, being careful not to tighten the ligatures too much; leave it for two or three days, and if the ligature becomes loose, then tighten it again; then untie it after a third or quarter of a day, and let the patient walk within four days; and if he walks before that time, there is no guarantee that he will not relapse.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a deep abscess occurs, you must calm it down as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	you must
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the arms are dislocated, they should be stretched gently without force, and this is a minor matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in the small of the back or foot, then you should make the patient lie flat on his back or on a table, quite straight, and place your foot over the affected joint, then press firmly on your foot until it pops back into place; and when it is aligned and there is nothing protruding, place a board with two crosspieces under the arch of the foot, then tighten it firmly, leave it for three days, then untie it; let him rest until he recovers.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When dislocation occurs with an injury and you wish to restore it, many times the patient will die; so do not be presumptuous in the treatment if you are not wise in the art or have not practiced it for long, nor pitiless and merciless, but cautious; and at the beginning use hot poultices to soothe the swelling, and leave the patient in God's hand if you see no hope of recovery; but if you do see hope, then immediately return the limb to its proper place, allowing the hot poultice to take effect; and when the limb is back in place, apply soothing poultices and treat the wound as it should be done with dried ointments; and if there is a fracture and small bones are displaced, set the bones and do as we have said for simple fractures; and beware of rushing into action out of fear, as I have said, lest you harm yourself according to your Creator, and for the sake of your soul and body.
Amen	So be it.
