O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O thou, my very dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine along with its fulfillment, and I have made an end through its expositions and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hands, namely 'surgery'.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of the hands is neglected in our region and is foreign and unknown throughout, the knowledge and skill have perished, and nothing remains but small descriptions in books by the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are closed off and knowledge is distant.And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hands, namely  'surgery'.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Now it seems to me that I want to bring this text to life together with the order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the tools for cautery, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good hand masters are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for those who practice medicine to surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as far as he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and veins, and the number of bones, and their dislocation, and the movement and rest of the veins from which they issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And because Hypocrites says that what is known with the name is much, and with the work is little; and likewise in the art of the hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, should be careful that he does not fall into error and harm people; just as I have seen many of those who interfere in this science and then abandon it without knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish surgeon who opened an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and opened the arteries in the neck; so much blood poured out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in the bladder of a man, and the stone was large; he took out with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the position of the disease and the size of the stone; if they cut it out, he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another man who was treated by a doctor from our land, who had a broken leg and with the break had a wound; and the ignorant doctor held the break over the wound with a splint with great force, and left no padding on the wound, and left it thus with a bandage; and he commanded that it not be unbandaged. And he remained thus until the leg was completely swollen and the foot, and it came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come to unbandage the leg; and when I undid it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and I could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the limb was entirely ruined.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another doctor who opened a deep abscess, and then it became inflamed due to the wickedness of his lord.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For when a canker is free of melancholy humor, one should not touch it with iron unless in such a place that one can completely remove all that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And so, dear son, you need to know that the work of the hands is divided into two parts: that is, in work where there is danger in various situations; and I will show in each part of this book where there is danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Because of this, it is necessary that you be careful, so that the foolish people cannot speak ill of you. Take up your arms in humility, and undertake your tasks lightly and firmly, and use the best means so that by the grace of God you may attain salvation and be praised; leave behind terrible diseases of sad health; remove your armor from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may pass from this world to one of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in some of his warnings: "Do not take on yourself any serious illness, lest you be called a fool.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have arranged this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medical cauteries, and it is the chapter arranged from the head to the feet; and of the forms of instruments, and of the tools for cauterization, and of all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and of cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and it is the chapter arranged with the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twistings, and similar things; and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus, as we remember the work, it is fitting that I say something about the nature of aid and the harm done by each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the longest discussion and most subtle science, and the secret responses; and the majority of the sages spoke about this, and agreed on it; and I am content with a little of their words, for I desire brevity.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery aids universally in all complexes where there is matter, whether the complex is hot without matter or dry without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In a hot and dry complexional matter, some people devised and said that cautery is of great help; and others said the opposite: that cautery is not worth it in a disease that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured by heat in a hot disease, nor by dryness; and those who said the opposite, said that cautery helps greatly in a hot and dry disease that comes to humans.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the human body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found this to be true through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And yet, I do not recommend this for those who have not experimented and who do not know the treatise on cautery well, or the diversity of people's complexions, the causes of their illnesses, their prognoses, and the seasons; for other complexions we are not afraid, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the doctors agreed on using cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my son, that cautery combines fire with secret remedies and is of greater benefit than burning cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not spread beyond the cooked member, nor harm another member if it be properly applied.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Burning medicines pass from one part of the body to another, and bring illnesses of sad health to the parts; and by chance they kill the patient Fire, because of its intensity and the goodness of its nature, does not do this unless there is an excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found by experiment and by long service and study of the art, and having placed myself under the guidance of truth, that is why I excuse myself for the length of my speech, for I do not wish to take from you the secret which is hidden in fire, nor the quality of its work, how it heals the diseases of the body, as the philosopher explains in his demonstration; therefore receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on what time cauteries should be performed, and they chose a suitable day.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harmfulness underneath is removed by the aid of cautery; and especially if the cautery is for necessary pains that are urgent and cannot wait until greater harm comes to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear son, as the foolish do; for the illness that is healed by cautery does not return; and they say so, but it is not as they believe, because cauteries are not medicines that move the complexion, and dry up the humors that cause pain, and are better than medicine for their swiftness, and for the virtue of their action and their lordship.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the illness comes sometimes according to the complexion of the disease and its location and its strength; and are gathered in it the excesses by the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cautery is administered where there is little excess and moisture, as with dental cauteries for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but that rarely happens.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the last resort of medicine; but it is true, yet they do not believe that cautery is worth more than medicine, and their intentions are false, for cautery is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of cure in any disease and they are ineffective, then we administer cautery and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is clear that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cautery with a gold instrument is gentler than with iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and its high value; and they said that the heat of cautery does not cause swelling, but this is not true, for I have tested it and found that it is true in some people; and cautery with gold is more effective than with iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	Nevertheless, when you heat an instrument of gold, you cannot tell when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down quickly; and if it is heated too much, it is done in the fire; and thus there are many difficulties.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And because of this, we use fire cautery, which we have made suitable for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have arranged this chapter from head to foot so that the way is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of the olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is useful for moisture and coldness in the brain, and there are two reasons for this: one is due to a disease called "soda", and the other is due to many humors that flow from the head to the eyes and ears, as well as for many diseases that come from coldness, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the patient is purged by a cleansing, dissolving medicine for 3 or 4 nights, depending on what the strength, age, and condition of the patient can bear; then have the head of the patient shaved.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then have him sit cross-legged in your lap, and place his hands on his knees; then place the root of your palm between the roots of his nose between his two eyes; and let him where it will hurt most, then burn the cautery, which is called 'olivare', for this is its form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the spot marked with ink, and move your hand up and down while turning it; then lift your hand gently, and examine the spot for a broken bone; if you don't see one, repeat the cautery until you do as I've told you; then take some silk and place wet cotton inside, and apply it to the spot; leave it for three days; then apply an ointment called 'tetrafarmaçon' until it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients say that when a wound is left open for longer, it purges more; and for this reason, they advise using leeches.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some say that one must let the cautery burn so much that part of the bone is burned, and then one should heal what is burned of the bone.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one must let the cautery burn so much that it makes a hole in the bone as wide as a woman's needle, so that the humors can issue out; and then one must leave the wound open for a long time; after which one should heal and soudge it.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of cauterization do not seem good to me at all, except in those where there is a fear of death; and I believe that I should leave it, for the shoulder is weakened by continued dislocations, as we witness in other members; and likewise when the shoulder of the patient is weak from nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more saving and mild, then I use this together in healing.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When throughout the head chronic pain comes and lasts a long time, one should use herbs and pills for the ill person, which are called "cochie", as well as poultices, oils, and plasters; and if they perform the cautery that we have mentioned before, and it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the sick person is of a strong nature and not too cold; then cauterize under that fire cautery a little bit which we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	Afterwards, cauterize each horn of the head just to the bone, as we have said before, and make 1 cautery in the place called "vasselz"; there is a place where one applies leeches; and lighten your hand so that you do not go all the way to the bone: the patient feels much greater pain with this cautery than with the others, and I will tell you about it later; and the cauteries on the horns should be more subtle than those used for cauterizing the middle of the head, and that is the shape:
dou cautere dou chief	of the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain occurs in the head, and the disease extends to the eye, and the shoulder is purged with purifying medicines, and all other remedies I have described in the division of diseases are tried without success: then cauterize according to two methods, that is, with a hot iron and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	For the cautery with a hot iron, take an egg and remove the shell and cover it with a bandage in two places on both shoulders; then make the temple where the pain is located so that you can place the egg under the skin. When it is placed, tie it tightly and leave it for 12 hours. Then loosen it and draw it towards the egg, leaving the wound as it is for two or three days. Then apply a cotton bandage soaked in butter until healing occurs.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the wound has healed, if you see fit, use some of the burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth chapter on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The cautery with iron is done in this way.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery tool until it is red hot.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "cauterization" because the head is made in the shape of a lid or cover, with a slight curve, and in the middle there is a small aperture; and place it over the painful area, and hold your hand and twist it slightly so that half the thickness of the skin is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, as it is out of control and flows profusely with blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	Afterwards, place cotton in the wound, and keep it there for three days; then place wet cotton soaked in butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this hemorrhoid with the cautery called "culter", do so at the very tip, and be careful not to touch the artery in this hemorrhoid which is not old.
de emigraine	of hemorrhoids
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat hemorrhoids as we have previously discussed in the sections on diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cauteries previously mentioned in medicine with fire or iron do not help, then you should heat the cautery called  "culter" until it is white; and sign the painful area with a line half a finger long, and lift your hand once, and press down so that you do not touch the artery and it reaches the bone; and be careful of the mandible that bites when one chews, and the nerves do not react so that there is no pain or spasm in the patient, and be careful of the flow of blood from the artery when it is cut, as the cutting causes great fear to those who are not familiar with it, especially if they are not experienced and untrained; and leave the wound open for a while; but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding of the artery when it is cut, and I will show you where it opens in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the end of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery which we have described in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has .ij. knives; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of ear pain from coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is ear pain from cold, and one has applied dissolutive medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not go away, then heat this cautery, which is called a "point", of which this is the shape:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After puncturing all around the diseased ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and move slightly upward from the root of the ear once you have marked the place to be treated; and there should be 10 punctures around each ear; then treat the area until it heals.
de la torture de la bouche	of mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	There is no cautery for ulcers except those that cause phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not use cautery on appearances that come from dryness and inflammation of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this appearance of torture that comes from phlegm and discharges from the head, and gargling does not help, then you must cauterize the patient with .iij. cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little beyond the temple, and the third in the junction of the two lips; and apply the cautery to the part that appears healthy, and cauterize the top of the ear just below the horn of the head, and another cautery in the temple as long as a thumb; and leave the cautery on until half of the brain is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the appearance of the knife is as we have said before, but it should be a little more subtle and the blade should be a little thicker; then treat the place as I have said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said but it does not help, and the patient has a fever, then do 4 cauteries: 2 on the 2 horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one in the place called "vassels" as we have said before; and do the last cautery over the mouth of the stomach. Treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	of quicksilver
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient large pills and cleansing herbs for the brain; then shave the head of the patient all over, and apply a liniment made from mustard seed as written in the treatise on liniments; and here is how to do the cautery: perform it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is healed thus, it is good; and if not, do 3 cauteries on the head going down to the neck, and there should be a distance of 2 fingers between each cautery; and treat him as the others, and if you see fit to adjust, and the patient is suffering, do one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, do another 2 on the horns, and treat him as before until he is healed; and let the cautery be called "olive", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness from the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to cleanse the head of hair and other things as we have said before; then raise the head of the patient, and cauterize in the head and over each eye, and one behind and three upon the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is strong, then do four cauteries on the spine of the back; and let it be until the deepest part of the heart is burnt, and lift your hand; after that cure it until it is healed, and use the cautery called "olive oil" which we have mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and first they must cleanse the brain of hair and other things that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is great and suffering from taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot bear it, make him gargle and chew, cleansing the brain often with good meats; then the king will cut off the head, and do to him .i cautery according to what we have said before, and .i cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the illness is forceful and suffering, do cauteries as I have said for paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the illness is in a child, do to him 1 subtle cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When through the cause of melancholy there are excesses or corrupted moistors and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with mild cauteries as we have said for paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if through the cause of melancholy there is a decline towards melancholy, and the body of the sick person is moist, then give him something to drink that will cleanse the brain according to what is previously described in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After taking the head of the patient, make a well-made pad in the shape of a circle, and place it on the head; then tie the pad firmly in place, and let the patient cross their arms; then present the linen, and apply melted wax of old bees; and heat gently so that the patient can bear it; then remove the pad from within the head, and let it cool; do this for the patient once a week with good governance until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or, if you wish to cauterize it by making several small points all over the cautery tool.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This cautery method moistens the brain greatly; afterwards, place wet cotton in lamb's grease and in tallow on top.
de l’awe des eulz	of their eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When eye problems first appear with the signs that I have described in the division, then begin and give the patient drinks that cleanse the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make him sweat in a bath several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	Afterwards he orders him to raise his head, and he cauterizes in the middle of the head, and makes 2 cauteries on the 2 temples if the dislocation of the eye is in both; or a single cautery if it is in one. He then closes all the veins and arteries below the heart with the cautery, and the cautery should be as long as the width of the temple. And beware of bloodletting, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it as best you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and the incision, the cautery that you should use to stop it; and sometimes a cauterization or incision is made underneath the 2 bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	of the body from tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears are old and habitual, and are on the veins or arteries that appear outside the head, and one sees that it is from cold phlegmatic superfluities, then he makes the cautery that I said earlier, descending to the eyes: 1 cautery in the middle of the head, and 2 cauteries on the 2 temples, and 2 cauteries or incisions underneath the 2 bones; and if there is a need for more, he cauterizes bleeding above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	where the body weeps from within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat the patient according to what we have said in the division and it does not help, then give the patient three nights of leeches; after that, bleed the head, and cauterize it with olive oil at its middle; and apply two cauteries made from a cautery called "clavilis" on the two joints, one under each ear; and beware of the artery so you do not cut it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is how the cautery called "clavilis" is formed:
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the membrane of the eye is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery, which is called "olive oil.
de coi ci est li forme:	This is how you do it.:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see two warts on the body as long as the sorcerer's hair; and do not take your hand away until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that points the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes the hairs of the eyes are converted to the opposite direction, and prick the eye, and they perform cauterizations according to two methods: that is to say, with fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a warm bath; afterwards draw on the paper a figure that is like the leaf of the myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be among the hairs; then moisten cotton with egg white and mallows on the eye, then heat the cautery whose shape is there:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure that you have drawn little by little many times so that the skin is burned there, and the sign of healing is that you see the paper retire, and the hairs rise to the tip of the eye; then lift your hand and leave it thus for 3 days, then moisten cotton in butter until the burn is healed; afterwards dress with ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards the hairs come again, and the paper is softened then recommence the cautery in that same place, just as you did before; and if the hairs are bald, then cauterize it until the paper is raised to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning cautery of medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow large and even, then make parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and live charcoal, each one-third, and grind them together well; and make it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it on the shape that you made like the myrtle leaf, and put it under the eye with cotton moistened in egg white; and if the ailment is only in one eye, do it in one, and if in both as well; and put under the eye cotton moistened in vinegar of eggs; and let the patient's hand be in a warm bath and place your finger on the medicine, and press a little and move it all the times that the patient feels biting from the medicine, because he feels biting as well as from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the bite has healed, raise the eyelid and check if the membrane is raised as it was by the pressure of the fire or by an incision; if so, all is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, apply more medicine to the eyelid or wherever the medicine has not worked, until your efforts are successful and the eyes are positioned correctly; then, place wet cotton in lamb's grease until the burns heal, after which clean the eye with the ointment called "diaphenes" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to be careful in your work so that it does not leak into the eyes at all.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterward, and the hairs prick in the eye, then restart the medicine on that area which has become softened by the paper properly, just as you did before; cure it until it is healed; and this is how to make the myrrh poultice:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to this, your constraints should be. And do not deviate from the right path for one who is skilled in this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	on the treatment of fistulas by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you are treating a fistula as we have described in the sections on diseases, and your treatments are not helping, then you should apply cautery according to the following method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to tilt their head towards their healthy side; and have an assistant hold their head steady in your hands so that it does not move or turn; then place cotton soaked in white wine or in juice of peony roots over the eye; next, heat the cautery instrument which should be shaped like a penknife blade, with a curved point, or like a tent peg; but however, the curved one is better for your task.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Then press the fistula if it is open and drain any pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, pierce it and draw out any fluid; next, place the hot cautery instrument firmly, and hold your hand on the cautery at the spot below the eye, so that your hand does not shake; place the cautery in the fat of the eye socket and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then restart the cautery again, and do so if you need to, and let it be for three days; afterward, put moist cotton on it, and cure it with a drying ointment until it is healed, and if 40 days pass and it is not healed, then apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and treat the king according to what happens in his condition.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula which some of the ancients spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	For a fistula, open it and pierce the location; then insert a thin wire made of copper into the hole where the fistula is located.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make the quantity of a bean; and hold your hand on the camel hair firmly, and do not move the patient so that the melting wax does not flow into their eye; and it is necessary to put moistened cotton in olive oil on the eye of the patient; the wax will then close the fistula and heal it miraculously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization that we have described, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then you must administer a poultice to the nail and draw out the fistula from within the nail according to what is appropriate in its own place.Si li fistule adonques ne se vout pas de la maniere que nos avons dit, si covient fendre li leu de la fistule, et mettre en li fendure un fil de lione ou l’on tisse les estoffes de lane, si qu’il s’enveine ains que li sang ne s’en veult; et li estoffes qui sont sus li fil s’enveinent.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cracks occur in the lips that are called "hair," especially in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have described in the sections, and the treatment is not effective, then heat a small knife-like cautery according to this shape:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it gently in the cracks until it reaches the bottom; then treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess occurs at the root of the throat, or in the uvula, or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, causing swelling and a boil, and it becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have described in the section on incisions, and it does not help: then you should use a cautery according to the size of the fistula; after the opening of the fistula, hold your hand steady so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and from behind; and do this once or twice, after treating it as we have described in the section on treatments, until it is healed; and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if not, then you must expose the area and remove the rotten bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it does not help, then put the head of the patient in your lap; after heat the cautery, whose form will be described below, in such a way that you place one end on the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside, holding it so that the patient feels the heat going to the root of the tooth; after lifting your hand, repeat with the cautery according to your desire; after filling the mouth of the patient with warm salt water, let him gag for an hour and spit out the fluid.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such a way the tooth that was loose is now firmly fixed, and the gums made soft are restrained, and the corrupted moisture dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of toothache
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from coldness, or there is coldness or whiteness, and medical remedies are ineffective, then cauterization is needed in two ways: with a cautery of butter and with a fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery with butter: take the butter from a cow's milk, and attach it to the end of a spoon made of iron or bronze; then take some cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent pole, and moisten it in the butter, and apply it to the aching tooth until it cools down; do this repeatedly until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. If you see that the butter has moistened the cotton, and apply it to the aching tooth, and place a hot piece of iron on top so that the fire reaches the gum of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	If the fistula does not heal after doing what we have said, then you must split the location of the fistula and place a piece of linen thread in the slit so that the blood flows into it; the material above the thread will absorb the blood.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in preparation for this cautery, and then let it drain out; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery of whatever size you want, according to what you have the power to do; and this is the form of the bar:
des scrophules	of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula is caused by phlegm and cold moisture, and is not cured by digestion through medicine, then heat the cautery in the way that follows, and there are two openings for the smoke to escape from one side of the cautery to the other; place the hot cautery on the abscess once, where it is needed, so that it reaches the bottom of the abscess; if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days; then moisten cotton with butter and apply it until the burn is healed; after that, treat the wound with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture prevails over the channels of the lung, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient must first be purged with solubilizing medicines; then make cautery at the root of the throat, and beware that you do not go all the way to the throat, but just scorch the heart a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then make another cautery at the joint of the neck at the head of the spine, and let the cautery be what is called a "clavicle", of which we have given the form earlier; and treat the area as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	of the tongue
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all lung diseases are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is chronic, then make two cauteries on the chest in the hollows; and another cautery between the breasts, and use the cautery called  "clavicle" according to the form given earlier.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see fit, make cautery with a pointed tool all along the cautery which is called a "point", of which the form is given earlier in the treatment for ear disease; and let the points extend to 30, or as needed.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After cleaning the wound according to what has been said before, and let the cautery be performed in three turns according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for this reason cauteries are lighter when you do them three times.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, ease the patient's back and side; then lift the heart, which is within the thymus, with the fingers of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, light the cautery which has two needles, here is its form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cautery the head until it pierces to the bone, and let the shape of the cautery come together with four cauteries; and this is why the cautery is made with the cautery that has three wires, so that the shapes of cauterization are six cauteries; and the nerves follow the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery that has three wires:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is adjusted above that one nerve so that there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Afterwards place on the cautery a little powder with salt; afterwards let the patient rest and not move the limb for a long time until he is fully healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, little happens, therefore make the cautery on the thick part of the cauterized clavicle, or a lot of cautery on the point.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	Because the joint is closed, and moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and a lot of moisture come to the stomach, straining it against its nature, and his diarrhea increases, and in the usual ways of treatment he does not improve, then the patient should be placed on his back, and his legs and arms stretched out.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	After that, make three cauteries: one under the heel of the foot according to the size of a bean, on all the cauterized clavicle, and two cauteries from both sides so that the shape of the cauteries is at three angles, and there is such space between them that they are not joined together when they bend; and let the cauteries be so deep that they affect both parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery inside the stomach according to this form; and whoever is afraid of this cautery, cauterize by puncturing and marking on the stomach one point according to the quantity that you wish to go in; then cauterize it with the entire cautery which is called "a point".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the healing of the wound that we have described before, until it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver has pain from cold and moisture and from strong winds, as it is moved out of its natural complexion by excesses; and the disease is treated with what we have described in divisions, but if it does not benefit, then the patient should be placed on his back; and make three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, avoiding the hypochondrium, where the ribs of man come from; and there should be the thickness of a thumb between each cautery; and the cauteries should be of the length of the body, and do not press your hand hard at all during the cautery; and only half of the cauterized area should be burned, and the patient should lie on his side; and if he cannot, then let him lie down, and stretch out his legs and lift up his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	If you wish, cauterize with the knife cautery, if you are skillful and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn all over the chest; and let it come no higher, for the chest is a very delicate place there, and you can tell by looking.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the liver tissue or in the membrane: if it is in the tissue, the patient does not feel too much pain; but if it is in the membrane, they feel intense pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then when this treatment is applied to the eyes, the patient should be reclined on his back; and then the area where the abscess is should be signed, and then the cautery should be heated until it is similar in temperature to a hot coin, which is how it should feel.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize with the cautery until the ulcer is burned, and it comes to a head, so that the pus is all discharged; after the wound has healed according to the healing of scabs until it is cured; and it is not advisable to use this cautery by anyone who has not studied long in the art of medicine, and through whom these diseases have sometimes been worsened.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore he can work bravely, and in any case it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the cautery for phlegmon
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should make cauteries for phlegmon from roots of aristologus, and in such a way: take a root of aristologus, long, the largest you can find, and dry, as thick and as long as your fingers; moisten it in oil, heat it up, and cauterize. One cautery between the Adam's apple and the throat, and two small cauteries going slightly lower into the part under the beard; two cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, bending a little backward; one cautery in the groin, and one on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two at the sides of the groin opposite the cautery between the shoulders; and do not press your hand hard, but do it gently as when using a perfumed oil.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And some ancients said that some men used an iron cautery like a razor, heated it and placed it between the ribs, until it reached the abscess; and if pus did not come out with the pain, as we have said in the abdominal abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this operation there is now either fear or death for the patient, or a fistula comes which cannot be cured.
de la mice	The man who feels the cautery all along his sides and through the groin and stomach, must get up in bed. And if the cauteries are so large that he cannot stay in bed, then he must get up on four or three pillows, and have the cauteries under him, while he is above them; and the cauteries should be in the space between the ribs, and the largest cautery between the two shoulders, then he should get up on five or six pillows.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of the remedies, and it does not help at all, then there are three ways to cauterize that are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	There is one method for this where you make III cauteries, or IV, by tracing according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the cautery that we have described before; and do not press your hand at all along the cautery, and let the patient lie on his back; and another method of cautery is that you heat the cautery with II nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the part where the mouse is, or the armpit from which the disease comes towards the left, and the elevation by which you lift the part according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and let the cautery be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After that, put the II nerves in flame until the heart is pierced from the other side; then draw away the cautery, and thus it will have IV. And if you wish, cauterize throughout the cautery with III nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the scrofula has been treated for a long time, and it does not heal as quickly as the other diseases mentioned before.
de ydropisie	of hydropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not effective for dropsy, except in the manner that is called "asclytes.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your treatment is not effective, then you should perform four cauterizations around the armpit, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the abdomen, two in the back on the spine, and one at the tailbone; the cautery should be close to the thick part of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the cautery open to draw pus for a long time, do not leave the cure of the patient after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the two intentions will come together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly is the chisel that we have previously shown; and for the back it should be olive-shaped, according to what has been described earlier.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet of the dropsical person are swollen and filled with yellow water, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; then lift your hand with the cautery without turning.Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, thus it would press against the yellow awl, and let the cautery be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After that, make 2 cauteries on each leg at the top of the tibia; and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other above, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries to heal without bandaging, until the water comes out; then dress the others as we have said.
de la menoison	of the brain
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When diarrhea comes from coldness and moisture, when the retentive and digestive faculties in the stomach and intestines are impaired, and cannot be cured by means of remedies; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with much strength, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before regarding the cautery of the stomach, with the circulating cautery; and four small cauteries around the belly, each cautery being subtle, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the elbow, and one cautery on each shoulder joint, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good support.Et si li fai  .i. cautere sus la tete, et  .i. cautere de costé, et  .ij. cauteres entor la cheville subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil; car li cure est profitans a ceus qui sont desaloiez de lor leu.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure for hemorrhoidsAnd si li fai   .i . cautere sus la tete , et  .i . cautere de costé , et  .ij . cauteres entor la cheville subtilz a tout  .i . cautere clavile subtil ; car li cure est profitans a ceus qui sont desaloiez de lor leu .de la cure des emorroydes
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are in the anus, one or more, and are old and filled with cold, moist, corrupted humors, and they are cured as we have described through divisions, but it does not help, then do cautery: three times on the spine of the back, that which is completely outside below the armpit, little by little in a triangular shape; and do cautery under the jaw, twice; and if you think the stomach is cold, and the meat is not digested, and they see swelling in the face, then on the face do one large cautery on the stomach, as it is described before, and another on the liver, and another on the mouse with the full cautery of a clavicle; and let the cautery remain open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After curing the site until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is named "thelul."
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you scrape the "thelul", heat the cautery which resembles a razor, and then place it fully heated on the scraped "thelul"; and hold your hand so that the cauteries reach the source of the vein, from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of "thelul," cauterize each one as we have said; afterward treat them with healing ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the scrotum, it will be of greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	of poorly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will discuss in its place, then such a disease comes that it cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is a fistula and it is suppurating and exuding pus and corrupted moisture, then you should probe it with a thin rod and be careful that you know how deep the rod goes.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery iron until it is red hot, insert it into the fistula according to the depth of the rod that went in, and repeat the cautery until the pus and corruption are burned, once or twice or three times, depending on how much is needed; be careful not to burn any nerves that might be nearby, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	if the fistula goes into the bladder and intestines, be careful with these areas, and do not apply the cautery too strongly, and think that it is not healed; after the site is healed and if the opening is still there and the matter is not discharged for a long time, then know that the site is completely healed; and if the matter is not discharged, know that the site is punctured and the bone at the bottom is damaged; and thus as one of those we will say in their place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When cold pain comes with rain and strong winds, and takes hold of a woman, then you must make a cautery on the rains on both sides using the key cautery that we mentioned earlier; and if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will provide greater relief.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, and the patient retains urine due to the condition, then make a cautery on the part above the bladder where the hairs of the pubic region start, with one cautery on the right and one on the left, and let each cautery be as long as the width of two fingers; also, make one cautery below the back, or two if you need them; and use the key cautery as described earlier.
de la marris	of the womb
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the matrix is cold and moist, and does not permit conception, and the flowers are corrupt and their terms late; and when they come, there is great pain: therefore one must make three cauteries around the womb, as we have said in the cautery for the bladder, and two cauteries on the back; and let the cauteries be of a mild nature, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous humors descend to the box of the hip, and because of this they move out of place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when one measures them together; and it is found that the place of the dislocation is hollow, then one must cauterize the patient on the box of the hip with 1 cautery resembling a circle, and mark before the location around the box as it turns, so that the box is within the circle; and let the cautery be like that which one uses to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present, make three cauteries of the olive oil large, and let the cautery be as deep as all the scabs; and heal it until it is better.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain occurs in the hip socket, it is caused by cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient of thick humors with foul-smelling pills, or other good-smelling pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	Afterward, let him apply a cautery; and there are two ways of applying cauteries: that is to say, with burning drugs, or with fire.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cauteries are of many types, one of which is as follows: you should make three triangular cauteries on the hip joint according to this shape, and they should be deep and large, with a space between each cautery the width of a thumb; the cauteries should be olive-shaped. Sometimes, a cautery is made in the center of the hip joint according to this shape:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you want to cauterize with the circular cauterization that we mentioned earlier in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circles contain the entire hip, and all the thickness of the heart is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And that is how one treats sciatica when the pain stays in the hip and does not go down into the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if the pain extends to one or both sides of the leg or foot, he should be cauterized where he feels the pain in three or four places with what is called the "point cautery." The cautery should be a small needle, and the thickness of the skin should be burnt. If the patient feels that the pain extends all the way to the toe or close to it, then he should be cauterized where he feels the pain in three or four places with what is called the "point cautery.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if necessary, make more cauteries; and if he feels that the pain is below the knee toward the thigh, then use a cutaneous or circular cautery, and be careful with all your cauteries not to leave the cautery on so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and cause the patient greater harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen several who have had cautery performed on the ankle of the foot, and they left it until the leg was completely swollen, and the foot as well, and it was pierced and corrupted all through the foot.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a stomachache that caused his death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, perform cautery on both, according to this manner.Et si li dolors est en deux parties ensamble, fais cautere en l'une et en l'auter, selont cette maniere.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise men said about the cautery of the hip, of which this is the manner, make the iron and let it be at the head as large as a thumb-nail, or a little less, and let it be pierced and let there be between them the distance of two fingers, and they must be on both sides, and they must also be like nuts; and it must have a good handle. And this is its shape:Et li saiges dirent de la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com un nauvillon de dacte ou un poc moins et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetre jusc’a l’auter d’espaice la cantitat d’un nou de poce, et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait li mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is all red and dripping hot, and then place it on the box of the painful hip, and let it be turned onto the healthy side; and cauterize once with one cautery and leave it for 3 days; and then make a poultice of butter, and let the wound remain open for a long time; after the cure of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its sight, and those who are experienced in it use little; and nevertheless, it is one of the good cauteries which can be endured, and it lies where it occurs.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cautery of medicine burns when you make the instrument to interlock in such a way that the rim of the door descends, and is made of brass or iron with a long surface, and at its height has two notches, and between each one there is the thickness of a fingernail; and are open below and above, and join together according to this shape:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	Afterwards, place the box of the hip on the patient lying on his healthy side, and press your hand firmly on the box of the hip; afterwards pour between the two circles of hot vinegar which has been heated in the fire for a moment, and let the patient bear the heat and burning for an hour.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it finds biting as well as fire; and when the bites have passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip with gentle vinegar, and let it be so for three days, and put butter on it until the blackness of the scald is gone; and leave it for three days until pus comes out; and that would be the last aid after the treatment of ointments until he is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, you shall make the instrument that colors in accordance with what you have done in the hip joint; and that is the manner of hot ash, and I have written it in the treatise on the rectification of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkaline and quicklime, as much of each, and grind them together, and place them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	And in that pot is a small hole so that the point of a needle can enter; and place on top of that pot another pot well sealed, and place on top of the alkaline and chalk and ash water on top, until it has two fingers above the powders after you have well moistened your hand; and let it be thus until there falls ash and pieces into the sealed pot, then take all that ash, and pour it over the hot chalk and alkaline as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then there will be much fever, and it is administered in the form of medicine and cauteries of other members; for it does as bad a job as fire, and so with other medicines from which one cauterizes the hip well, such as thistle and honey and soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a cure by which a man was cured of hip and sciatic pain, and he praised it greatly, saying that nothing else was done to him, and that he was healed at once when this cure was performed, and that he bathed as he instructed below:
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he said in such a way that you take litharge green and dry, and grind it very fine with a little tallow, and apply it to the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is, and let it sit; and leave it for three hours, and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then let him enter the bath until his body is a little warmed up, and let him enter the bed, and the pain will go away completely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such medicine after an evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's dung, it helps a lot; and the cautery should be performed in the following way:
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take lamb's wool and grease it with old oil, and place it on the hollow between the big toe and the one next to it, which is called the sciatic nerve.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Then take dry goat's dung and heat it in the fire until it becomes charcoal, and place it on the wool, and leave it until the pain is gone; and do this again, and keep doing this until you feel that it has reached the hip and the pain has stopped; and this cautery method is called "goat cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	of back pain
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When back pain comes from sitting or impact or from excessive evacuation, or from similar appearances of cold matter, none of these warrant cauterization except that which comes from the diffusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is appropriate, after the patient has voided foul pills or other similar substances, to make three marks on their back where the pain is located, and in each mark, administer .v. cauteries or more depending on the strength and amount that the patient can endure; and the cautery should be performed according to the cautery called 'point'; and if you see fit, perform .iij or .iiij cauteries with the medium-sized cautery instrument according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often affects young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a tight, constricted appearance when they wake up, and fear; and you will find it in the last vertebrae of the back and in the appearance that comes over the other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you cure it, then cauterize it with a cautery of salt according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the purple cautery equally affects every part of the spine.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery tool 2 or 3 lines apart, and have the pricks close to one another.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	Afterward, treat the area until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware of administering cautery in areas with gangrene that is in the webbing between fingers or toes.
de la dolor des jointes	of joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain is caused by moisture that is spread throughout the body's limbs, and when pain comes in the feet, which the doctors properly call 'podagra', and when it is caused by cold and cannot be cured by medicines, then it is cured by cauteries in such a way: make the mouth of the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-colored according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is a need to prick the sole of the foot, do the cautery with the entire tool that is called «point.»
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and that happens many times, do cautery on each knee III or IV cauteries of each part, using the entire olive-shaped tool; and if you need more, do more, but do not hold your hand there any longer than until the thickness of the skin is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knees and back, administer the cautery that we have described in his chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make punctures around the wrist two lines; and if there is no pain remaining in the fingers, make punctures on each joint and on the palm of the hand; and if the pains come to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and provide good management for the patient and take medicine.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you provide good management for him and purge phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rot of the eye socket
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the ulcer comes in the anus, and the bowels descend to the testicles and it is new, then when you see him being cured, he should not defecate that day; and he should use things that loosen the belly so that the farts descend from his belly; after that, let him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to press his anus until the bowels are repaired, and bring them back to your fingers, and sign with chalk underneath the ulcer on the bone of the buttock, and throughout a sign that is similar to half a circle on top of the body; then heat the cautery from which this form comes:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it becomes white and starts to ooze pus.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bones to their place; and have the patient hold his hand so that it does not return; and work the thighs well for the patient, and put a pillow and a servant under the thighs, and another under the buttocks to keep the hands from moving; then put the cautery on the wound all over your hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, do it again until you reach the bone; and be careful that the pus does not ooze when you are doing the cautery, so that you do not burn him, and so that the patient does not die or suffer harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to the size of their ears, and for large people as large according to their size; after three days, treat the site of the cautery with butter until the scorch is removed; then treat it with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days so that the wound is well closed; and it is necessary to let his hair grow long enough that his head does not get wet when he goes out in the rain.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wants to get up, let him be given a well-made bandage which he should wear for another forty days; and let him have good rest, do little work, and guard against too much drinking and eating, and straining his voice too much; and if he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will now describe how to treat an abscess on the head.
de la routure dou ventre	of the bowel movement
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ulcers appear on other parts of the body and are recognized, and you see that they are no longer growing, then treat them with fire cautery according to their size, burning to one third of the skin's depth; after this, treat them as described above. Some ancient writers say that they should be cauterized with a three-pointed cautery according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But first mark the site with charcoal and draw a line around the edge of the ulcer, and another from above it, and keep your hand steady while doing all the cauterization.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cautery is lighter and gentler.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain occurs in a limb, whether from a fall or injury, and the pain persists for a long time, and medical treatment does not help, then it should be cauterized with a cautery called "point," according to the length of the limb, its smallness, weakness, location, and the nature of the pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is healed by the first cautery, that is good; if not, do another cautery on top of it, for such is the custom that it should move in the member that is nearest to it, so you must do the cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	from mixing
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The diseases are sometimes aided by cautery with great benefit, especially those that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	When you see her cauterized, take care whether the disease is in its beginning, and if it is healed according to what we have said in the division, and does not go away or remain, and you doubt that the corruption may spread throughout the whole disease, then do five cauteries on the head: one on the crown at the front of the hair, and one on each temple, and one behind on the nape of the neck; and let your hand remain so that the cautery reaches the bone, and as much as the scalp comes out from it so that the vapors of the gross humors can issue out through it; and cauterize on the mouse according to what is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the disease is scattered throughout the body, and it is clearly lost, then you should cauterize her with these cauteries that we have mentioned on the head, and one cautery in the nose, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one on the groin and another there, and two on the two shoulders; and two on the elbows, and two on the tendons of the feet, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and be careful not to burn the nerves that are on the back of the calf. And sometimes do one cautery on the bone of the arm, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more you do cauterization, the more it helps, and moves the profit; and know that the patient does not feel pain from cauterization as a healthy person does, because the body is already entirely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cautery be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After that, treat the site with wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes to any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it does not heal, then you should do cauterization on the member according to its size; and the cautery should be slightly inserted into the depth of the skin; then cure it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes cautery is performed on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that paralyzes the limb, and thus the swelling is removed; yet no one should undertake this unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
de albaras	of almond milk
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" appears, and medicine does not help, then cauterize it with a slightly deep cautery, according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed and the color changed; then cure it with a poultice of linseed and lentil flour, with rose oil, and plantain leaves, and colon blood and almond blood, each ingredient being used in equal parts. Mix everything together and apply it, wrapped in a cloth, to the affected area until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the cure of cancer by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a ulcer first appears, and you wish to stop it, then cauterize it with a cautery that looks like a circle, all around the edge of the ulcer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And yet the wise say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the ulcer; and yet this does not seem good to me, for I fear it will be burned and corrupted, and I have indeed seen this happen sometimes; and a more certain thing is that it is cauterized around the edge, with a cautery called 'circle', as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot subside
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it lingers, either because of the excess fluid it produces or because of the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is, very old), and he has little blood, or due to the duration of the illness; and you see him hastening to die: therefore cauterize around with many small cauteries by pricking; then leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten death.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing all the way through, then heat the cautery with which it is formed:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of that disease which is called  "adubelati" as long as the cauteries have pierced the skin, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels them drawing out in such a way that the flow of the pus is slowed.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Afterwards, treat it until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cautery by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	There is another kind of disease which is called   "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a eating away of a limb, for it gnaws at the limbs just as fire burns dry wood.Et adonques covient ke li membres siano defformiez, et li malaides se sentont grant dolor, si com ilo est a la maladie  «adubelati».
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a place that can withstand fire cautery, then heat the cautery iron very small and large, according to what is appropriate for the location of the disease; after cauterizing all over, so that you reach all the corruption, and none remains, so that all that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and apply soothing ointment to the cauterized areas with oil until the fire wounds are healed, and all the corruption is gone.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	Afterward, use healing ointments generated from flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that new flesh is not growing, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains of the corrupted areas.Et s’il aduient que li membres soit demores por cause de moistor ne de froid, si covient qu’on le chauffe avec char pians, et le curee et le chauffe, et le curee, et l’oigne, tant qu’il soit sain, et le laisse III jors.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this disease has sometimes been cured by medicine instead of fire cautery; but nevertheless, fire cautery is much more effective, and I have already described the cure for medicine ague in the previous chapter: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of warts that appear on the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that a disease called 'ulcer' in our language occurs on the feet due to moisture, and is a large, rotten mass that bleeds from the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the treatment for this disease has two methods:
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	Namely fire cautery and hot water cautery.Et li un prend la chair en haut et la tue et tue li piez; et l’auter ne tuet pas la chair, mes tue li nervues qui sont dedens le piet.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is where you heat the cautery as hot as a needle, and it is made of good iron to the size that it can pierce the nail on all sides, and has thin edges; after which, you apply it hot to the nail and rotate your hand around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail; then let it be for three days until pus starts to come out; then make a poultice of crushed mallows with salt, and leave the poultice on overnight, and the nail will fall off and be pulled out by its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the area with a healing ointment until it is cured.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are turned away from the body, and often occur in hands and feet, then you should administer hot water cautery; and it is in such a way: take a brass or iron rod, or a pen, and place it over the nail and the skin, that is, warts; and place the rod so that it covers all around, then put a little drop of hot water, and hold your hand steady, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the rod comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water deep into the root; and let the patient endure the burning sensation of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will be pulled out by its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another, until you draw out all those who are in the body, then cure the wounds which generate pus.
li cure dou trembler	the cure for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone shakes from coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever or other, you should make them .iiij. cauteries or .iv. on the spine of the back, .i. cautery between each vertebrae; and .i. cautery on the feet, and .i. on the stomach with an olive-sized cautery; this will stop the shaking and hasten the healing from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of stinking pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes they appear as sores on the body, or foul pustules, which come from corrupted humors.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If necessary, when they first appear, one should make a cautery on each tip of the pustule: with a thin cautery of myrtle wood, whose point is taken up in fire, or of long aristolache root, or with the lens-shaped cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow any further, but the surplusage from which they come is disrupted, and they are healed; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.Si ele est si grant que elle soit de la granture d’une fuit ou plus, si faice li cautere sus le chief de la pustule, et non pas sur le corps de la pustule, car il ne faict si granz domages com s’il estoit fait sus li corps.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	There are many times great bleeding from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or with the incision of an abscess, or with the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very sorrowful thing to stanch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet when this happens to someone, quickly place your index finger over the wound of the vein and hold it very tightly until the blood is calmed beneath your finger and no drop comes out; then take several small and large olive-wood cauteries and heat them in the fire until they are all red; then take a little salt, either large or small depending on the wound and where the artery is rupture, and place the cautery over that vein where you hold your finger, and keep it there until the bleeding is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it bleeds when you lift your finger from the wound and the cauteries are extinguished, quickly take another one of the cauteries which are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease doing this one after the other until the bleeding is stopped; and beware of damaging the nerve which lies nearby, and that no further harm comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be stopped well by itself alone if the artery is large, unless by one of four methods we have mentioned: either by cautery or extraction when it is not treated, or by a strong ligature, or by medicines placed on which have power to stop bleeding; and let it be bound and pressed gently.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers a tight binding of bandages or places burning things on top, or similar things, will not benefit if only a little.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to someone and they do not have any medicine available, then they should put their index finger on the wound as we have said, and press firmly both on the wound and the vein; and they should not move it, but moisten it with cold water often so that it is very cold until the blood is congealed and swollen and pressed firm; and they should make inquiries in advance about what cauteries and medicines are needed.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of wound treatments
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about all illnesses that require cautery with fire or burning medicines, and their cause, instrument, form of cauteries; and I have placed that chapter from head to foot, and I will go in this chapter by the same path so that one may more easily find what they want.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so that I may begin this, my dear son, you must learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and because of this greater caution is needed.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For there are many ways that people come into care.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	if they come from such who are so worn down by their illness that they die easily because of the wear and tear of their disease, and because of the great severity of their suffering; and one must fear these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And there are those who give up their senses and say, "Wait, I am healed"; and the disease is stubborn.Et il doit on avoir paor por ce que il ne se remue pas tant qu’il est garnis de sa cure; car il peut bien avenir que li maladie revienne et li corps soit despitous.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	You should not consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put more confidence in your honor than in your desire. Do not open foolishly, but wisely, that of which you are certain and from which you can gain profit and fame. Use prognostication and indication in the cure of your illnesses, to which salvation is turned; and this will aid you in acquiring a good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, our Lord gives you good understanding and righteousness, and if you want to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have ordered this chapter in a discourse on chapters, according to what it is before the chapter on cauteries, which I have discussed from the head to the feet, so that you can find more easily whatever you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Do you know that this disease often comes to infants during childbirth, and when the birth canal is too narrow for the baby's head; and sometimes it comes from a relaxed birth canal, which no one knows about.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease in anyone but children, and in all those that I have seen, death soon followed; and for this reason it seems better to me to leave the treatment in a few simple remedies.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose head was swollen with water, and the swelling increased every day until he could no longer bear it; and he died of the moisture, which had gathered under the skull between the brain and the bone; and if the moisture is between the brain and the bone, and the abscess is small, then make a large slit in the head, as long as two fingers, so that the moisture may flow out; and here is the form of the spatumile:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess is larger, make two slits in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the corners of the head opening in every part, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand from within, and it does not close up again: then you must make three slits in the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all moisture forcibly.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Afterward, tighten the incisions with bandages and powders, and apply wine and oil, leaving it for five days. Then remove the bandages and cure the wound by tenting and anointing, allowing the head to hang freely, and feed the patient dry meat to dry up any moisture, until the limb is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look at where the abscess opens, and the gathering of pus; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	So cut where the abscess opens and the gathering of pus, and pierce according to what you can; and be careful not to cut the artery, and let blood flow, so that the patient dies from bleeding and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	from gout
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When someone suffers from a condition called "cataract" in the eyes or feet, and the disease is old, and medical treatment is ineffective, then the best course of action is cauterization by cutting the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is necessary, therefore, when you see them covered, that the patient bends his head backwards; then rub the area around his neck with a rough cloth until the veins appear, then press the patient's neck all the way to the cloth; then look where the vein runs, and its course is from behind the ears, and it is very deep; then mark the spot, then cover both sides with a sharp spatula, as far as the vein, and this should be done through the back of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it, put the spatulum under the artery and cut it from above, cutting also as deep as two fingers across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, the blood will flow out continuously upward.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the vein does not appear to the touch, then you must measure the amount of space between three fingers, then mark and cut to the bone; and the amount of blood that should be let out is six ounces, and by accident a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the filling of the vein. Then examine the wound: if there remains nothing on the bone, cut so that warm pus does not come, then press and bandage the wound with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of emetic
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient emigrant comes, and catarrh is acute, for the moistors of tears and the chills in temples and ancient soddeness and similar things, and it is medicined by manners of cures of medicine and all that does not benefit him at all, then let us draw out the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have related.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of the extraction of them is that the patient pulls back the hair of his temples, and feels the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is little relaxed outwards when in some men who are too cold; and if it is relaxed, then the patient strains his neck with some cloth, then rubs the place with some rough cloth, and washes the place with warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatulum made from which there is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	then lightly scorch the skin until you reach the artery, then pull it upward with tweezers, and carefully separate it from the tissue underneath in each part; and if the artery is delicate, return it to the tip of the fingernail, then cover that part according to the amount of the two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not covered, the blood will not stop flowing everywhere.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out the blood from 1/4 to 3/8 of an inch; and if the artery is large, you should tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread so that pus does not come before the wound heals, and bleeding comes slowly; then bandage the excess between the two ties in the same hour, and if you wish, cauterize it with a hot-iron cautery up to the bone so that the shoulder is cut; and this is the best treatment if the patient doesn’t have a fever and is of a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	Because cauterization helps to end moisture; that is why it is more helpful for moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the place with old cotton and places it on well-made tents; and when they are taken off, cure them with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with tents, until they are healed; and if there is an artery without a vein as far as you work, hasten to cover by cauterization, or employ vitriol and stretch out your hand so that the blood is stopped; and if you don’t have that at hand, put your finger on the place so that the blood congeals, and moisten the place with cold water until the bleeding stops, and bind it as it should be; and what is better and lighter in the extraction of an artery is to cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery of 2 parts, but let the cutter be well thickened so that its heat lasts longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when an instrument is too thin, it holds its heat less well.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And between the two knives there should be a space of a finger's width, and then when you have cut through both sides and placed the hot iron on as far as the bone, and split the vein in two places; and the two parts should be pulled apart so that they are not fused by this cautery all the way through. This is how the cautery tool should be formed:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When tears are flowing from the eyes which are above the testicles on the head, and medicine does not help, and you see the face of the patient turning red, and there is a beating in his forehead as if from trembling; and if the eyelids are thin and moist so that the hairs have fallen out, and the eyelids are scorched by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called it the "crushed wound" in the old language, and it is for you to do on the patient who has this disease to let the hairs grow on his forehead, then make III incisions on his forehead evenly according to the length of his forehead; and one of the incisions should be as long as two fingers across his forehead, going down into the eye socket, and the other two on either side above the eyebrows, and be careful not to cut the arteries that are on either side above the eyebrows; and keep your hand away from the jaw, and each wound should be the length of three fingers across, joined together; and have ready a piece of sponge and a lot of gauze to soak up the blood, then insert the spatulum into both parts where the deformation is:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision that is to the temple up to the second incision; and scrape all the skin that is between the two incisions up to the bone, then do likewise from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then remove this spatulum.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	then insert into the first incision the instrument that is called  "cultellarius," and it is very sharp on one side, and not at all sharp on the other, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place it cutting towards the chest to the heart, and the flat side towards the bone, and cut until it reaches the middle split.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous to what is open from the heart, and then make another cut in the middle split to the other defiant; and then draw out blood equally, and express the place for the drawn blood; then put a tent made of old cotton into each split, and put wet clothes soaked in wine and oil and garlic on it, and guard against hot abscesses coming to it; and on the third day loosen the ligature, and administer plenty of cold water, then cure it with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other cures used for wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	from the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When someone has a constant catarrh, and you see the eyes are sunken and small, and the vision weakened, and the eyelids burnt, and the hair falling out, and in the head there is pain, and the patient sneezes; then know by these signs that these matters and this catarrh come from many veins, and the remedy for it is to cure what is inside.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you command the patient to look straight ahead, then make a large slit in the middle of his forehead, and another one an inch wide.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begin the incision from the left temple to the right temple, and cut down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves in the temples that move when you chew; and once the bone is exposed, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, and then insert old cotton and tenting of linen between the two lips of the incision; then bind wet bandages soaked in wine and oil over it, and beware of hot abscesses; when it is healed, you should rub the bone until new tissue starts to grow, then treat it with drying things that promote healing.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this way: take two parts of wheat-flower and four parts of colophony, make an ointment from it, and administer it to promote healing throughout the wound.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	on the stopping of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of four things: either grains or a beast, or stone from a mine, or similar object like iron; or seed, such as peas, beans, and lentils; or flowing liquid, like water and garlic and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it sinks into the ear stone or any other foreign object that does not adhere to or grow in the ear, hold the ear towards the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see a stone, drop a little violet oil or oil of wormwood on it, then administer extraction; and make him sneeze with powdered scent, and plug his nostrils when the sneezing comes on, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and let the ear be uppermost.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	It often comes out through this treatment; and if it does not come out, then one administers extraction with fine forceps, as shown in the figure.
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out with the tweezers, that is good; if not, then administer extraction with a fine needle of small wire; and if it does not come out in this way, then make an iron hook and insert the tip of the hook into the ear canal firmly, and plug the area around the hook with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the hook; then pull it out gently, for often it comes out as we have said. And if it does not come out in such a way, then take some glut and use it to grab birds, and place some instrument that is suitable for this purpose, and put some cotton around it; then press the glut onto the pebble or whatever it is, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not come out with all the things we have said, then be quick to split the ear so that pus and blood comes out, and a spasm; and the manner of the splitting is that you first make the patient fast for three days, and bleed him according to his condition, then make him sit between your hands and turn his ear upwards, and make a small slit in the root of the ear at the fat where it depends; and the slit should be like a crescent moon, so that you can reach the pebble, then remove it according to your ability, and suck on it strongly with your mouth; and treat it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain that is inside and it swells, then administer removal; and if it cannot come out, then administer .i. spatumile with a thin needle according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision on that spot.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think the grains are moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many attempts; then extract it with fine forceps and a suction tube, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.Et si tu ne puets le faire aligerement, et que li piere soit grant et secque, puis le faire secher avec oile de l’arbre d’alosee, et quant il est sec adousé de oile d’olive et de pite, et li sucurses de l’estrainne, si com nos avons dit; et li estraignons la seconde foiz alergeument.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the pain therefore that falls into the ear, the patient should use snuff of first materials, and stuff the ear with soft cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let him lie on that very ear where the pain is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps out through the air, that is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If it does not go out through the air, then take many small stones according to the length of your finger and heat them gently in the fire; and insert one into the patient's ear, and let him blow on it from his other ear, and press another stone upon the stone which is in the ear; and do not stop doing this with stone after stone until all the pain goes out, and thus will it all come out; and if you see that, take a straw and put one end into the ear, and heat the other end in the fire until the most painful straw is burned; then do the same again with other straws until all the pain goes out, as we have said about the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of an object from the ear, if it is a small object such as a flea or similar, treat it as we have said in the previous chapter. But if the object is large enough to be felt, administer extraction with pincers; and this is the easiest method to remove something from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	When extracting worms from the ears, if you treat them as we have said in the section on distillations and the treatment does not help, then you should examine the ear in the sun. If any worms appear, then catch them with fine tweezers; if they do not appear, then take the skin of a chicken where the comb is,
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it is narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And insert the smallest end of the cautery into the ear according to the amount of pain from the ailment, then suck firmly on the tube; do this repeatedly until all the pus comes out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not come out, then stop up the cotton tube as I said for the stone; and if they do not come out as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven for worm treatment, and you will find them in the section on distillation; and distil your oils and medicines into the ear through this instrument, so that their shape is as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it should be made of silver or bronze with small holes beneath and open above for distillation; and to press the distillation into this instrument use a well-made bronze tool, and if you wish take a razor and wrap cotton around its tip; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicines you desire, into the chicken skin, and let the skin be in the ear; then put the razor with all the cotton inside, and press your hand gently so that the oil is distilled into the ear; and the patient will feel it inside, and the distillation should be slightly warm as it is poured into the ear; and take care that it is not too cold, for the medicine will not work as well.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	on the stopping of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without an opening in their ears; and the same thing happens to men due to the clogging of a wound, or due to pus forming inside the ear, and sometimes this clogging extends deep into the ear, so that one cannot see it; and sometimes there is only a slight blockage, which can be seen easily.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	When it occurs deeply and cannot be seen, it is a matter of great concern in various situations, and in such a case, one should hold the affected ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the membrane becoming apparent, then treat it according to its appearance.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And it should be sharp and pointed in front and behind, so that it does not pierce the ear; if the membrane is due to pus or some other substance inside the ear, then grasp it with a pair of fine forceps and squeeze gently until all the substance is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the growths are deep in the ear, then take a thin and subtle razor and heat it slightly in the fire, and then insert it into the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the itching that the patient feels deeply in his ear, pierce it slightly, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then insert a plug into the ear according to the width of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this each day until the wound is healed, or take a piece of cloth and moisten it in rose water, and powder with vitriol; and if you see swelling in the ear, then you should remove the cloth and replace it with another moistened in cerotum made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then heal the wound.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if there is bleeding, plunge a sponge and cloth in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other remedies that stop the bleeding that are used for treating distilleries.
de la char des papieres	of the pulp of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This althelul comes from papers when they are wet and dry, you should extend them with tweezers and pincers, and the tip of a spatulum from its roots; then put powdered vitriol on the spot.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without skin, then cauterize with a subtle lens-shaped cautery, and the cautery after the incision is valuable; and many times they return, as long as nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of hailstones
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times they come out of the ears, things that look like hail in its form and hardness, and because of this, this disease is called "hail", and it is a collection of thick moisture on the paper above and below; the treatment is such: if the hail mutaes from one side to another, and it is an easy thing to know, they then open it wide, then lightly peel each part, then pick it up with tweezers and cut it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper slightly, do not harm the patient; and if the slit is large, assemble it with a stitch, and treat it until it is healed; and if it is small, do not force it, for ointments will restore it at once.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hailstone is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, then reverse the paper, and the hailstones are held with tweezers, and covered and pressed from one side to another; and if the paper is separated by the incision, it does no harm; and when the hailstone is covered, wipe away the pus with a clean cloth, and cure the area where the wound is until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a fat that is woven into the fabrics of papers, and this happens more to children than to anyone else, and it is very serious for them. They get catarrh in the mornings, and they cannot bear to look at the light of the sun because their tears run down their faces; and because of this, they lie on their backs and sleep, and their papers are underneath their eyelids, which are moistened by the discharge and covered by the exinach that appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the eye with your fingers and feel the exinach coming out.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the way to do it is that the sick person puts his head on top of the healthy one; and then take a linen cloth and prepare a tent in the form of a circle according to the quantity that contains exinach from each part, and then put it over him; and press with your fingers on both sides so that the exinach is gathered inside the circle. Then make an incision in the middle of the moist skin with a sharp spatulum, and do not make it larger than the wound made for the vein opening; and in various dispositions, exinach comes out of the slit according to the shape of a piece of white grease.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then take out the entire piece of cloth with your fingers between your thumb and forefinger, and turn your hand to the right and left so that it is spread out; and be careful not to put anything in the slit, so that you do not come to the spatula all the way to the eye, so that you do not hurt it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the wound does not open at the beginning of the slit, then widen the slit slightly until it opens; then extract as we have said, then moisten cloth in vinegar and water, and apply to the area, and extract with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such people who grind it down and put something on top to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cleanse the eye until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is a hot abscess in the eye, treat it with soothing plasters until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	of the hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When papers grow hairs of a different nature than usual, and they are enveillit, they harm the eyes and cause various diseases, such as tears, and softening of the paper and albugine, all of which lead to the destruction of the eyes; and there are four ways to treat them: by cauterization with fire, or by medicine applied to the eye, or by incision and stitching, or by caustic substances, depending on what is described in this chapter on cauterization.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary for you to place the head of the patient in your lap, then turn the paper on his eye to your left hand; if it is turned, that is good; but if not, then put an needle with thread through it from above; and have this close to the margin of the paper where the hairs are growing next to these hairs, and draw the thread across the paper to the top, and turn it over to the razor; then, on the part under the paper, under the hairs, all around, as much as the spatulum covers, from the large eyebrow up to the small one; then pull out the thread, and place a little tent of cotton and linen underneath the paper, and sign a figure of an inch, like the shape of a myrtle twig, and still it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity you see rising above the paper which is split in two.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if he has to cut, then one cuts a great quantity of the paper according to how soft the paper is; then they mark on all the spatumile along the two lines that you have signed, and start from the large nostril up to the small one; and let one of the slits be near the natural hairs at the thickness of a root, then stuff the eye with one of the two angles of the heart, then scrape it all off; then sew together the two lips with a needle and fine thread of wool, and draw out the blood, and dry up any excess of the threads over the two nostrils with anything sticky, if you see fit to do so; if not, then don't worry about it, then leave the sutures and threads for three or four days; then cure the wound without sutures using dry and constrictive things, because the paper lifts up at the wound's soudure and its joining together, but the sutures are painful (as the ancients say), and this is work without fear; and there is another way: one marks the paper with a shape that is like the leaf of a myrtle, as we have described, with three curved notches according to the form given.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut away what is on top of the smaller forces evenly according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	If you lack the strength to hold the tongs, and the object is not even, then take a needle and thread, and pierce it through the center of the wound; then pierce another thread through the large lip of the wound, and the second thread through the small one, and bring the threads together equally between your fingers; then lift your hand equally, and lift up all the skin above which you have made a sign, as we have told you, then bring the two lips of the wound together with stitches, and heal it until it is cured; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerotion and similar soothing ointments; and sometimes the hairs of the paper turn inward: then you must use what we have said about the incision; but the stitching on either side is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure for warts is according to this form: and it is that you turn the paper inside out and cut it inside according to what I have said, and then make two warts by art, and two subtle threads as long as the paper and the broad scale of the wart; and cut at two heads where you hold the threads; then bring one and the other together subtly over what is on top of the paper of the eye, and strain the two warts from the two parts formed; and leave it thus for several days, and the skin which is strained will die and blacken and fall off, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it takes time, and the wound has force, then heal it until it is cured; and when the wound is closed and the paper lifted, and the hairs no longer sting; and this is the shape of the two cannals which you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	the work is such that you thread a fine needle with a fine silk thread; then bring the shoulders together and tie them up gently, and let the length of the threads be about the size of a palm; then prepare another fine silk thread in the needle, and tie off the ends of the thread; then have the patient place his head on your lap; and be in the sun so that the work is exposed, for it is a subtle and small work, then insert the needle through the paper to the root of the hair, and draw out the hair until it comes out of the paper with the natural hair; then extract your hand until the hairs come out of the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the thread is pulled and the hair does not come out with it, then pull the thread from underneath until the thread comes out of the hole above and you see it with your eye; then pull on the thread and the hair, and close your eye for two or three days, so that the hair regrows in its place and the flesh grows over it again; and if the hair is short, accompany a long hair from the eyebrows, and let it grow with the one you are treating until it is elongated and then release it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the puffiness of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease called "alacrity" or warts comes in the eye, there are two ways of getting it: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or cutting or cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way to treat it is to split that sore, and loosen the edges of it, and put in tents made of linen, and keep it open until it is healed; and you must not use in its treatment anything which would dry it up and constrict it.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do that, the disease will return worse than before; but treat it with softening things, such as fenugreek; and rosewater or altée and flaxseed cooked in water, and ointments of diluted alkanet, and wrap a tent around it, and cure it thus.Et qu’il soit sanee, si est bon qu’on le cure de oignemens de la teneur d’alcanet, ou de saindore et de l’huile d’amandes dolces, ou d’autres oignemens amollissans.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the essence of your treatment is that you take care that it does not swell again according to the form it was before; and these works that we have said are only remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to the form it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is beneath, which is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Accidents come from wounds and cuts and cautery and similar things; the way to treat them is to take a needle with double thread, pierce it into the flesh, and then bring out the thread through both ears so that the thread comes out in two places on the skin. Then the skin will be pulled taut above the needle, and the cut will be held wide open by the thread.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the wound returns as it should be, that is good; if not, then take a razor and place it in the wound, and turn the skin, and make two cuts along the sides within the skin; let the two cuts on the two angles of the incision you have made, so that when they are put together, the shape will be like the shape of a letter that has the sound "I griesche". Then remove the skin, according to the quantity that its edges are cut beneath it, from what follows the skin; then join the two separated parts and sew them up with a thread of wool; then treat it as we have said with softening medicines, and tents, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a split or wound or cautery, then you should make a single split underneath the hairs of the papers, and according to what is said above; then separate between the 2 lips of a poultice, as I have said; and one must do the treatment according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and the wise masters prepare things with all their power so that they make the shape return to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what he needs of treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	from sudden papery
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this sudation occurs in human hands in such a way that the paper above is sodden with the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must push the tip of a razor beneath the paper, and lift it upward; and hold it with tweezers, until you grasp what is hurt in the subtile spatula, which is not too pointed nor too trenchant, so that the patient cannot bear that the too-pointed spatula might pierce the eye; and your incision to peel this union should be light, so that the paper returns according to its natural form; and all this union is healed, and they sometimes make in the eye a salty wash, and lift it with sweet water, and use a collarette; then place between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and place over the eye wool moistened with egg; and after the third day use the collarette and the soothing things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	You know that the nail is in two ways: it is nervy and resembles a .ij. hard syphac, and another which is not nervy, but resembles white congealed moisture; and when touched with iron and pinched with tweezers, it cannot feel anything; and both appearances begin towards the great tear duct, and grow little by little until it covers the entire sight, light, and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of the incision is that the patient puts his head in your lap, then you work the eyes; and hold the paper in your hand, then curl the nail with tweezers of small doublets, and place them on top; then take a needle, and put in it one horsehair, or cow's hair, or ox's hair, and a strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and insert it among the nails, and pierce all the way through the needle, and tie the nail with a thread and place it on top, and scorch all along the hair the edge of the nail which follows the eyelid and the silk to the hair up to the head, then cut off the remaining part at the root of the tear duct all the way to the subtile spatumile and with small forces, and leave the natural flesh or eyelid, so that through the incision does not come the body of the tears accustomed; and sometimes only the nail is placed on the oncine, and with the thread, as we have said; then scorch it all the way along the spatumile:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And beware that the spatumile does not touch the flesh and break it, and that the prunele is not pierced; and after the incision, pour into the eye a little powdered celandine, and from the collar made of litharge, and leave it until the next day; then treat it as needed until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot pierce it with the needle, and the oncines cannot enter, many times this kind of nail is cured by medicines; and they grow again as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, then work the eye of the patient, and take the spatumile lightly according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And raise the nail gently, and if you see that it does not diminish and the pus is pressing out, then distil from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litharge and red copper and crushed seal, and stop up the eye until the next day; then recommence the other work according to this same procedure, until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is no obstruction in the eye, such as an abscess, then use milk, and first treat the abscess with a hot poultice until it is healed, then recommence the procedure as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh around the eyelid is damaging the eye greatly, then cut it away at the edge, and only a little at a time so that no body fluid enters the eye; then distil into the eye a red collar made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh which grows on the eyeball
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	In some men, a red spot sometimes appears on the eyelid, covering the pupil and pressing against the eyeball, resembling a rose on a baluster; and the treatment is for the patient to press his head against something solid, then work the eyelid, and apply the spot of skin to the nail of his thumb, holding it firmly in place; he then cuts through the first spot, continuing to cut all around until the skin is completely removed, being careful not to damage the eye during the procedure; and if there is any remaining tissue, he should cover it with a hot poultice and apply a warm compress, and if it persists, he should leave it and treat the abscess with remedies that soothe hot abscesses; then return to the treatment until it is healed, and in this way, he can deal with any spots that appear on the eyelid in this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, you should always use the natural remedy for weak eyes and the accidental remedy for iron work; and do not insert your finger in any of these procedures until you see that this member is suffering from that procedure.
des voines des eulz	of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Red veins which cover the eye, impede vision and weaken the eye every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is therefore necessary, first of all, for you to examine the eye and determine whether it has any other disease besides the red veins; then proceed in this manner: instruct the patient to lean his head back, then squeeze those veins gently according to your wisdom, and let the oncines be doubled according to this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And make two incisions in the eyelid, one above the other, according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then press those veins gently, and draw out the blood an hour after another, until you have removed the veins from the eye; and be careful not to cut the eye with the points of your knives, and perform this operation at noon in front of the sun, and be very skilled in your work so that you do not slip and cut the eye; and when you have finished, distill into the eye a green and red колир to purify what remains of the stye.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot collect all of this in that hour, then make a poultice over the eye with things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for several days until the pain is assuaged and there is no more hot abscess, then begin again according to the method given above until it is healed; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the eye fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with cautery and medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then pierce into the abscess where it must be, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then return to the instrument from which this form is made; it is called the  "aspre chief", and is made by grinding down a piece of horn until it is sharp like a file as shown in the present figure.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it over the site of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers and press your hand slightly until you feel that the corruption has been removed; do this several times, then restore the area with drying medications.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the veins are swollen, and pus collects, and the body of the bowe is swollen, and remains so for 40 days, and does not recur and is not abscessed, and no ill accident comes, you may know that it is healed; but if not, then there is nothing to do but to open the fistula at its orifice with a needle according to this form: and let you uncover the bone a second time with iron and with aguish medicines, and when it is uncovered take up the forest according to this form, and let the head of the iron have three angles, and the staff be thinned to the end as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then he puts it on the bone of the arm, and moves his hand away from the eye a little, then returns to pushing the needle all the way through the bone until he feels the patient's pain as the air enters if he keeps his hand over his nostril; then dress the wound with dry remedies as I have taught you, and when the flesh has healed and hardened, examine the nail; it is easier for the patient this way.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the output of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are completely open and there is no disturbance to the nose or diminution, you should ligature the patient; then bleed him, then apply cupping glasses or leeches without piercing, to suck out, then place over the eye a poultice made of acacia gum, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla, and then compress the eye with bandages and drapes; the manner of the drapes is that you take quite soft drapes, and double each one in four, and then place one on top of another according to the quantity that the eye requires; then compress from above with a firm bandage, and repeat the cupping without piercing; then remove the cupping glasses and leave the eye compressed day and night, and if the ligature softens, you should compress it strongly; then remove the poultice after a day and a night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good; if not, repeat the poultice, and the drapes, and the poultice, and the cupping until he is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	from the ruptura of a woven cloth
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the woven cloth, then it opens up and appears like a grain of resin, and is frightening to look at; therefore, if you see it covering, the work is such that you insert a needle into the root of the part underneath up to the part above, then insert another needle where there is a double thread from the part of the eyelid; and pierce the latter, and leave the first needle according to its position; then cover the area of the double thread and tie one part of the cloth around it, and compress it well; then remove the needle and place raw linen soaked in egg white over the eye; and leave it until the threads tear with the cloth, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is constrained by the cloth on each side in a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the eyes appear swollen, pierce them with a sharp needle that penetrates through the white of the eye, and draw out the fluid, then push the eyes back in and they will heal.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the eye socket
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called "alcunnati" is not dangerous except for the lump which gathers in the eye, resembling water but is not; and the way to treat it is to make the patient sit upright on a chair, then take his head between your hands from both sides and move it until you see the lump come up towards your eyes; then let it be, and darken the light, and have the patient look at things as he used to; if the lump does not go down below, know that it is water, and if the lump is not apparent as we have said, take a needle from a thread.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the spatulum and press it against the conjunctive membrane where it meets the cornea and the corona, until the eye pops out; and when it is popped out, instil into the eye warm water mixed with honey, or water in which fenugreek and honey have been boiled, then treat it further with other remedies until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the eye's waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have already spoken of the appearances of diseases in this division, and what should be done to pierce them; now act according to the state of health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	You should make the patient sit between your hands, turned away from the light of the sun, and hold the healthy eye closed and firmly pressed; then take in your left hand, if the eye is on the left, a piece of paper which has been soaked in warm water with honey or fenugreek, and in your right hand, if the eye is on the right, the instrument called «almagda»; then insert the tip of «almagda» into the white of the eye at the height of a hair from the edge of the pupil, towards the part where the tear duct drains; you will see the bone through the clear conjunctive membrane; then push the instrument to the depth of a hair from the edge of the black pupil, and express «almagda» firmly and repeatedly.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	if water now runs down, the patient sees himself and the instrument before him.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After a short rest, and if the water flows back up the second path, push it out with the instrument, and when it is stuck and does not flow, gently twist your hand a little; then put some powdered gem in the eye again and remove the instrument.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then push into the eye cotton wool or lamb's wool soaked in rose oil and plenty of egg white, and bind it with a clean cloth.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, put on powdered cumin mixed with plenty of egg white.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are some people whose eyes are too hard, then you must use the instrument called 'alberit', which has this shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And so you pierce the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make the cut shallow, then put in the alum, as we have said; and when the work is finished, prepare for the patient the appropriate dark room, so that he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and he should avoid all movements, and eat light food, and not move his head or to the right or left, and he should be bound according to his condition for three days; then untie him in that same dark house, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then put the bandage back on for seven days; and you should not do this during the hour of the incision or afterwards now, but you must wait until the water flows rapidly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	if such an abscess comes, that you loosen the eye before the seventh day, and the address of he who soothes abscesses; and when it is appeased, then loosen the eye and put on its face a piece of gold to cover some wound, and let it remain in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then leave the house little by little, and return to his own case; and know that no disciples should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from Spain, who told us that in his country they used alum pierced, with which one sucked out the water, but I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read about it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagest, because those who do not know them can see them; and they are properly made of brass:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let the heads of these be of the same subtlety, and the points in four angles acute.
de la char sor le neis	of the heart upon the veins
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes they are born with various deformed limbs, from which there are some that look like scorpions at the end of the feet; and there are some with a limp with a dark-colored foot, and a clubfoot with a fair-colored one.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	With such a clubfoot, therefore, you should make the patient sit in your hands facing the sun; open his nostrils, and put the needle into those limbs, drawing them out; then touch that which you can withstand with a very fine needle at one end, until you know that the limb is entirely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if anything remains that cannot be covered, then open it with one of the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if without you are overwhelmed, or an abscess forms, then lances it as it should be; and if it is a malignant abscess, then hasten to cauterize it until the pus is drained and all the pus is removed, then pour in wine or water.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If it works and moisture reaches the palate, you will know that he is healthy; and if moisture does not pass through as it should, you will know that there is bad blood in the bone above, for which instruments cannot reach to cut: therefore, you must take a fairly thick piece of linen thread and tie it with your fingers, leaving a gap of one or two fingers between each knot; then put the patient's nose on the thread at their own pace, and draw it through the nose into the mouth with scent until it reaches the palate; children often do this in school, and it is easy for anyone who wants to do it. Then hold the end that comes out of the nose in one hand, and the end that comes out of the mouth in the other hand, pulling them gently so that they are even with each other.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this until you know that the nails have corrupted the flesh, then draw out the nail, wipe away the blood, and moisten the nail in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that is left of the flesh; and then put a plug of linen in the nose for some days until it heals, and if there is need of dry medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to cleanse the head, with which one distils oils and medicines into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it can be made of silver or brass, similar to an open lamp, with a handle, and it should also have a lid; and if you want, make a closed cane, and let the instrument be hollow for cleansing the ears; and it should have a handle at the end for holding it when heating oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the heart upon the veins
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "tuberculosis" arises in the head of the veins, and it grows and becomes large, so that it is visible to look at; and therefore you should cut it at the beginning, and remove all the pus, then place the hot cautery or medicine upon it; and if one delays cutting it until it has become large, then be wary if it is hard, discolored, and lacking in sensation: do not touch it with iron, for it is an abscess, because when one cuts it at any time, great harm comes to the patient. And if the abscess is due only to pressure, not discoloration, and you see that one can cut it all away, then evacuate the patient and cut it without fear, and cure the area of dry and constricting things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the vein is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when a solution of continuation comes in any of these cartilage wounds, it benefits little, unless in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, when it happens to someone, consider whether the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then stitch together the two lips at a seam, then heal it until it is healed; and if the lips are torn on both sides, you should scrape away all the parts of their skin until they heal, then sew together the two lips at a seam, and tighten them, and powder with dragon's blood powder, and burned incense; and put on top of the powders a piece of strong plaster or other binding plaster, and let it close up by itself, then heal it with ointment.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of sewing is that you use thread: either with needles as we said for sewing the belly, or with thread as I have already told you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At times there are hard abscesses inside the lips, resembling grains of peas, both smaller and larger; therefore, you should open the lips, and cut on each nodule, and pinch it with tweezers, and scrape away any dry matter until the wound is cleaned out; then apply vitriol powder to the incision, and then use an astringent, and treat the area with poultices until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of gum disease
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times a growth arises on the gums, which the ancients call 'albulus'; you should hold it with tweezers, cut at its root, and let the blood or pus flow; then place powdered vitriol, or other restraining and drying powders, on the site; if the growth returns after the incision, and this often happens, cut it again and cauterize it; if it does not return after cauterization, and this is the form for treating abscesses.
des sordens	Here is a translation of the provided text:
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Here is a translation of the provided text:
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when treating a toothache that you delay as little as possible in pulling the tooth, for there should be no excuse not to do so; for it is a very serious matter to delay.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore, when the patient is compelled to pull, you must be certain of the toothache.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain deceives the patient and believes it is in the good tooth, and makes them pull out the healthy tooth; and even so, the pain does not leave because of this, as long as the evil tooth remains, for we have already seen this happen with these patients. And when you are certain that it is a toothache, then you should scrape around the tooth all around, opening the gum widely; then move it with your fingers or with thin tweezers little by little, until it is well loosened, then grip the tweezers tightly; and let the patient's head be between your knees, and hold it firmly so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	Afterwards, pull out the tooth firmly without breaking it, and if it does not come out, take one of these instruments and insert it into each side gently, and move it as you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and rotten, you should fill the hole with a piece of cloth, and then gently pull it with tweezers so that it does not break when pulling; and one must work bleeding around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be careful not to break it, and leave a part of it behind, which will cause greater pain from the root than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And beware of doing as ignorant surgeons do, who often break the tooth in their haste and audacity, and do not follow our advice; but sometimes they bring on great illness through infection from the roots that remain, or by breaking the tooth, as we have often seen. And when the tooth is pulled, wash the socket with wine or garlic and salt; and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, apply powdered vitriol to the socket; and if this does not help, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of forceps, with which one pulls out teeth first, should have long points and thick handles so that they do not bend when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be made of thick metal so that they do not bend when pulling, and they should be well-made iron, and serrated to hold the gums.
de la racine des dens	from the root of teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains in place, you should apply wet cotton soaked in butter for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the area is softened, then apply the tongs called "algefri", which make the shoulder look like a sick bird's beak; they should be made inside just like a file, and that is their shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tweezers, you must uncover the skin all around the root, and insert the instrument called "althali", that is, a splint, which has this shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And it should be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out through this, that is good; if not, then you must use all the instruments, of which the forms come later:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And one should also use this instrument which has .ij. prongs, of which the shape is:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are in front of teeth, and this instrument which looks like a large pair of tweezers, whose shape is:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And have this instrument outside so that it cannot be broken, and know that many instruments for teeth are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise subtle master finds by himself his instrument, according to what his works and the disease show him, because there are many diseases where the ancients did not teach any instrument due to their diversity. And if it doesn't break the cart or other bones, or it protrudes, then he searches for the instruments he needs, which I have told you about, and helps with gestures, of which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be thick and well-fitting to hold the bone so that it doesn't slip, but he can hold and remove it; and then restore the place with appropriate medicine. And if there is protrusion in the bone, and it is small, then use this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural body, and its shape is ugly, especially in virgin women, then you should know whether the tooth is new after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and it cannot be filed or ground down. So pull it out; and if there is abscess with the tooth, take this instrument of which the form is like a small beak, and let it be made of iron with a sharp point at its end:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And push it in and out little by little due to the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others. And if it is apparent, and can be filed down, then file it with a special file as shown in the form:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and is also like the file with which we make needles; and in filing, press gently, day after day, little by little, until it does not move, and then smooth it at the end with a file, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, one should file down the sharpness until it is even so that it doesn't cut the tongue or distort speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth are crooked
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth is loose, either from blows or falling, and the patient cannot chew without pain, and you have treated them with constricting medicines which do not work, then they must be restrained by a gold wire; silver wire turns green and rusts, but gold never does. The wire should be neither too thin nor too thick, depending on the amount of space between the teeth. If you see the teeth moving, take the wire and wrap it double between two healthy teeth, then place the shoulder between the teeth that are loose, whether there is one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then start the treatment again from the beginning, and gently tighten your hand until it does not move. The ligature should be at the root of the tooth so it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then grasp the teeth with tweezers, bring them together and place them between the healthy teeth so that they do not pierce the tongue; then leave them thus clenched as tightly as possible, and if they come apart, either the threads will break or he will tighten them with another thread; let him stay like this and function all his life, and this is how the teeth are formed and arranged in the healthy jaw, both the top and bottom sets, as you can see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when a tooth is missing, we replace it with a new one, as we have said; but only a wise and experienced person should do this, and sometimes we make a tooth out of cow bone and put it in the place of the defect, restraining it as we have described, and it remains and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover the thread of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Sometimes this ligament, which comes under the tongue by nature, is born like that; sometimes it happens due to a wound, and the operation is such that you open the mouth of the patient, place his head on your healthy jaw, and pull out his tongue; then grasp the nerve of the broad ligament so that the tongue is dislodged from its socket, and if there is hardening or a nodule, it is due to an abscess, so you cut it with a sharp instrument and grasp the ligament; be careful not to pierce too deeply, lest you hit the artery underneath. When you are done, raise the vein with rose water and garlic, or cold water, then place a tent of linen under the tongue; and every night, paint the wound with a mixture of lead and vinegar so that the edges do not adhere.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if bleeding occurs, then apply powdered vitriol to the site; and if the blood stops flowing, then cauterize with a lentigo cautery, which is good for this. Then treat the wound further until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it is red or black or hard, and the patient does not feel any pain, do not touch it, as it is a sore; and if it is inclined to blanching and there is moisture, pierce it with a needle, and drain it from both sides; and if bleeding occurs due to your treatment, apply powdered vitriol until it stops, then return to your treatment until you have removed everything. Then raise the area with garlic and salt, and treat it with other remedies until it heals.
des apostemes de la gorge	Of abscesses in the throat:
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes there appear in the throat what are called "godath", which are properly called "almonds", and when you treat them as described above and they do not heal, then take care: if it is a hard abscess of small size and a light color, then do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron, also because of the flow of blood; but let it be until it is dead, and then you will separate it, or it will burst on its own; and if it is of a white color and the root is thin, then have ready the instrument for covering, but first look to see if the abscess has settled and is pacified.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Therefore make the patient sit facing the sun, and have his head in your lap, and open his mouth and press the tongue down with your fingers, and hold the instrument between your hands, and shape it according to its form; it should be made of silver or thin brass like a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Then you press the tongue against all this instrument, and you will see the abscess; take a needle and insert it into the almond, and draw it out above as much as you can; then draw some threads from the cloth with it, then cover the instrument with which this shape is made, so that it looks like a hook; and even though the heads are curved, and one towards the other, and they are very sharp, and made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, then cover it with tongs, of which this is the shape:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And let it be cut in one part and left uncut in the other; and when you have lanced one of the tonsils, lance the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and water and garlic, and if bleeding occurs, gargle with water, or scalded pomegranate peels, or bay leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then cure it until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses develop in the throat besides the two tonsils, so lance them in the same way as the two tonsils.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman of an abscess that was inside her throat, namely a small abscess; and she had almost all her throat closed up, so that the woman could not breathe through the passageway which was blocked, and she could not eat or drink, and would have died if she had remained like that for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high that it had forced out two holes through the nostrils.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I hastened therefore at once, and inserted a hook into one of the holes, then drew it out, and removed a great deal of pus; then I pierced another hole in the other nostril, and cleared her throat and pressed her tongue down; afterward, I inserted the hook into the abscess, and removed some of it, and only a little blood came out; thus was the passageway of the woman's throat opened up, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not cease cutting into the abscess for a long time; and the abscess grew again, filling up the space which I had emptied, so that it became very large; therefore I lanced it and cauterized it within the throat; thus it remained without growing; and I left those parts, and she was in God's hands after me.
de l’uve	of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the iris descends to the eyeball, and it is swollen and it is long, then it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is thick and round below, then it is called an "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the eye's abscess is pacified, and it is thin, then you should cut it; and that which is round and not long, and is blood-red or flesh-colored or black, then you should avoid cutting into it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger in it for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it according to the manner which I have described, of its whiteness and length, you should make the patient sit facing the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument which we mentioned earlier; then insert the needle into the eye, and draw it underneath, and cut at the end of the two instruments that I described for cutting into the two almonds.Et la cope a li II estrumens qui sont de l’auter costé, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument susdit, et si le laisse un peu de temps ains qu’il se remuë.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you must not cover anything more than the excess that is beyond the natural term; because if you cover more, it weighs down the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said about the incision of the two testicles, and heal it until it is cured.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of covering, then you should use the cauterization of fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The nature of the cautery is as follows: take hot iron and apply it to the part that needs cauterization.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is that the patient puts his head in your lap, and then presses his tongue to the instrument that we described in the chapter on cauterization, and mixes it with quicklime, so that it is neither too thick nor too clear; and use the application of this instrument, from which comes its form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it has a handle at its head where the medicine is placed, like the handle of a spoon, and the instrument is applied to the whole medicine on the eye; and the patient should lie on his side so that the saliva and mucus from the medicine flow out of his mouth and do not descend into his throat and windpipe. Then hold your hand over the medicine and press it on the eye for half an hour, until you see it swell and the burning of the medicine is soothed; then take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into the cotton around the eye, so that the cotton adheres to the eye; do this often until the cautery is complete, then leave it to dry for four or five days. If you need to renew the cautery with medicine, do so, and after the cautery, wash the area around the eye with cold water, and treat it with gargles until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision or cautery; if it is healed by fumigation in this manner, take calamin, hyssop, oregano, rue, chamomile, avens, and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in a pot, and add garlic, and let it boil. The pot should be well glazed with strong clay, and the handle of the instrument should be bent according to this shape:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	Whether it is made of silver or bronze, and one of the eyes is pushed into the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the eye through the canal, until the eye is deadened; then repeat often until the eye dries out, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the appearance of a hot abscess, because many things happen; and do not do this except at the decline of a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put a chicken egg inside the end, so that the patient's mouth is not too hot; because the chicken egg does not allow the vapor to burden the mouth, and it is a salutary remedy together.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Often a fish bone or spine, or some other thing, gets stuck in the throat; so you should treat what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all your instruments, so that you move the object; and if it does not become apparent to you and is lodged in the throat, then you must make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps the thing will come out through vomiting. Or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a morsel of dry bread; and attach a string to the sponge and then swallow it; and when it reaches the spot, it will get stuck, and then you can pull it out; and if it does not come out through what we have said, then take an instrument of soft lead according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And the instrument should be bent at the tip so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have its tip lifted up high; and take care not to touch the epiglottis, or he will vomit everything, nor push the bone inside; and move so that the patient swallows the instrument, so that he can move where the object is stuck; then he swallows it down, or pulls it out with all his strength, equally, until it comes out.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the blood from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Sometimes the bloodletting is the medicine, as I said in the division, through the cure of medicines; and when this does not help, then look at the patient's throat in the sunlight, then press their tongue with the instrument I told you about.And if you see that the throat is very red, it is a good sign; but if you see that it is pale, it is a bad sign; then press harder until you feel resistance, and do not let go until you feel the pulse in the instrument.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see a vein, draw it gently with a small hook, or with subtle tweezers that are fit for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if it is not effective, take a piece of horsehair and insert it into the throat of the patient, then heat the end of the hair with hot iron, and do this frequently.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the illness is due to water, all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth and pour it in without swallowing, and move it around with his hand frequently; and as soon as the vein feels the water, it will subside.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not subside as we have said, smoke the patient with assafetida, using the instrument I described for smoking the throat; do this many times, for it will subside without bleeding.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the way of the fume is that you put charcoal in a pot with a lid pierced in the middle, and the instrument's head in the hole, then blow your smoke, and the patient puts his mouth on the pipe, closes his mouth so that no smoke escapes, but goes to the blood; and the blood will fall soon, and if it does not, then restart the smoke many times; and let the patient be thirsty, and eat salted things, and drink nothing; and then he will need to urinate through this regime.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And if he does not urinate, then strengthen the body with hot baths and by anointing the body; it is good for him to stay in the sun and eat things that are warm. And if his body is very cold, then bathe his head first so that he does not move, then bathe his limbs; and if he still does not urinate, then bathe him all over, and let him eat and drink warm things. And if it goes as we have said, know that the blood has withdrawn.
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	There are many kinds of abscesses, according to what the memories come here after one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and size; and there are two ways, one is in its own appearance, and of what it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is for warts on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	for the abscesses on the head are different from those in the buttocks, and the abscesses of the fleshy parts are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own method of treatment.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if one should not pierce an abscess until the pus is mature according to its course; and some must be pierced when they are crusty and do not die according to their course, such as those that are near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when an abscess comes near a joint, and one lets it be until it is completely pus-filled around the joint, often the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which causes contraction in that member.Et si li apostemes sont creuz et la carne demure entor, tant qu’il n’est pas creuz jusques a la chair morte, tant il ne se guarit mie; et quant il sont creuz jusques a la carne morte, alors si se guarit.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Where the abscess is near the principal member, if you delay piercing it until it is ripe, it will harm the principal member; and if it is near the fundament, one should pierce it so that it may ripen; but one must not pierce an abscess without digestion being completed, except for one that is near the fundament, lest it burst inside and become elongated, and a fistula results, taking a long time to heal.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And one should know the time for piercing an abscess that is ripe according to its nature, and this occurs when the pain subsides, and the fever lessens, and the swelling and redness decrease, and there is less discharge and pressure from the head of the abscess, along with other signs. One should pierce where the abscess is largest and where there is the most discharge; and the piercing should be done in a vertical direction from the body, especially if the abscess is on the arms or legs, or near joints, affecting nerves and arteries, and in all similar cases where there is no fold.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	For those who bend, according to the affected member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to leave the piercing until it is consolidated with digestion completed, as we have said.Si tu veilles apercer le charnut, si doit tu faire si qu’il ne vienne fistule; car li charnus sont de nature froude et fraiz, et li muesciles se desfaissent promptement et la chair reste fraide.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it earlier, the body's venom will flow out and fill with foul matter, and the lips and depths may harden.Et se il est delez la plote, si doit tu le percer ainsois qu’il soit meurs et non pas avant ceu; car si tu le perces ant ceu qu’il soit meurs, li venim qui sort de lui, si est froude, et ne peut se confermer en grant termine, et est longes et durs.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if an abscess is opened according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you should treat small abscesses with small incisions; and large abscesses with large incisions, and many slits according to the appearance of their size; and if in such abscesses one should cut out the core and cover it over when it has become like a drum skin and died down, then one should do as is done with blisters: and if there are some that are split into three angles, and others that are covered like the leaf of a myrtle, as are abscesses of the bowels; and if there are some in which one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those that have no head, as with a superficial abscess, one should pierce it directly; and when the abscess is large and has formed a great boil, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but some of it; then stop the abscess until the next day, then draw out some more; do this repeatedly, little by little, until all the pus comes out; likewise if the patient is weak, or a woman carrying child, or a small child, or an old decrepit man.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the experienced sometimes jump out of the belly with the exit of the bowels, which inadvertently kills the patient, and you do not realize it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived your abscess, wash the wound, and look to see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a flat ulcer, apply tents made of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess with many openings, you should put a tent in each one so that they press against each other; and if you have cut into the skin around the abscess and covered it all around, you should fill it with dry cotton or rags of linen free of moisture, and bind it for up to three days; then remove it and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bloodletting occurs in your work, bring cold water and a wet cloth, and place it over the bleeding area many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding persists, bring relief and treatment, and the powders I have mentioned earlier in this book; and if it is in the winter, and the area is very nervous, then you should place wet tents and cloths soaked in warm wine and oil over it; and if it is in the summer, and the area is fleshy, then you should place wet cloths soaked in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, for a third of a day, as we have said; then loosen the abscess, wash and treat it, as appropriate, until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And now you must know generally about the treatment of abscesses; I have already told you how one should go about treating abscesses, and now see this chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	From the neck come small abscesses, and they are caused by insects that live in our clothing, just like the lice on a goose, and there are many variations of them.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fatty and smooth where there is moisture as well as pulsation; and there are some that are hard and stony in texture, and there is no doubt if the artery does not cause contraction.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the waist is that you must first test all instruments called "syringes", from which the forms come later, whatever they contain.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, it will flow out from above.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is expelled, it scabs without leaving anything behind from the skin that contains the moisture, for it returns again if nothing is left there; then plunge cotton into Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and salt, and apply this to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and those who stay through the night will heal.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then begin again with the cotton, as before, on the second and third day, until you know well that it does not remain at night; then heal the wound with ointment that is suitable, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds a lot of pus, cut it according to this form, from the center; and pour out your fingers, and scrape off all around, and put all your treatment in pulling out the cotton where he lies; and if the artery makes a contrary sound, do what I told you after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do with the abscess if it is stony, and cut and cure as I have told you.Car la piere se tuit apesentement ne fuist traie hors du corps, ains doit demourer lor, et n’est pas grant disconfort a li membraire; car de l’un est le piere, et de l’auter est li sang; et s’il ne fuist pierous, si doit estre curé com je t’ai dit.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the incision on a painful, moist abscess is lighter, because they contain little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if some of these abscesses have no moisture in their heads, and I copied an abscess from the head of an old woman; and found the abscess like a hard stone, rough and white, and could not be broken; and if one had cut into it, they would have made a wound just like a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming from the head, those that come from the heads of children and from the roots of the ears, the opening should be made in the most dependent location so that the pus can flow out; and they should be treated as appropriate.
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times abscesses come on the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come elsewhere in the body, and they are large, and they are intertwined with each other.Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And every scrofula is properly within its coat, as the nodule and abscess of the head, as we have said; and the similitudes of these scrofulae are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are some that are malignant and will not obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	So with the one that you see has a good disposition to touch, and is similar in color to the body, and is even on all sides and is not sunken into the vessels of the neck or the artery or the conduit, and is not deep; so you must cover it from above, and scrape away at every part, and make the two lips of the wound even, as needed, as we have said regarding abscesses of the head; and draw it a little bit at a time, and be sure that you do not cover the nerve or the vein, and do not use the spatula or forceps so that the hand slips, and do not look too far ahead, lest you cover what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you pack the vein or artery and it will not allow you to work, then put in the wound vitriol ground, or any powder that stops bleeding, and compress the wound; and let it be until the abscess is pacified, and the wound softens, and begins to discharge pus.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the bleeding has stopped, return to your work, until you finish it; then examine with your finger if any small scrofulous tumors remain, and scrape them out and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrofula, you must not pack that scrofula at its root, but ligature it with a strong double thread, and let it drop without harm; then treat the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then heal it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut away the entire scrofula, then you should bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now, since there is no longer any surplus due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	you should proceed to cut away at the root of it, pull it outward, and sew it up as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofula that hold surplus, pierce where it appears to be dying; and pierce it thus as that one before was said, depending on it, then administer poultices with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what is left of the corruption; and when the wound is clean, then cure it with ointment soaking up pus, until it is healed.
de squinance	of squint
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancient wrote and spoke of the incision of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is their written word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have squint, the flap of the throat called the 'epiglottis' should be cut; and this is done by those who have hot abscesses in their mouths, throats, or both armpits.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the lung, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the loss that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we want to split the epiglottis, we should split it below three circles or four a little slit crosswise between the two circles, or according to the amount of the slit in the hyoid bone; and those places are suitable for the splitting of the epiglottis that there is no pus, and the vessels are long from it.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, he should then split the skin of the throat to the base of the tongue, and cut through the cartilage until he reaches the jawbone; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then stitch up the wound as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the artery of the jaw which jumps out through the broken place, and by the loss of voice; and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed for which you doubt strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound in the heart, and sew it up entirely without the cartilage; then administer remedies that promote scabs, until they are healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says to do this only as long as the throat is completely choked, and the patient is judged dead, and the lack of breath continues.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then stitch up the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe through the wound and thus be guarded from death; and for this reason the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the violence of the disease had passed, which passes in three or four days. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and cure it, once it was cured; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw a young maiden take a knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the tendons in her neck; and I was called to heal her, and found her as good as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound and found that the blood which had issued from it had not oozed or flowed further than the throat, and the vein had stopped bleeding.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened and sewed up the wound, and healed her until she was cured; and the maiden had no more pain in her throat, and returned to her normal state; therefore, I say that one should not fear cutting into the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This type of abscess is called "gorge hernia", and it is a large abscess the color of a purple-red, and it occurs mostly in women; and there are two types: natural and accidental; the natural kind has no pus.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental type comes in two forms: one is similar to a cyst, and the other is like an abscess that arises from an artery; there is fear involved, and one should not attempt to force it with anything except on a small one, and test and probe throughout the entire opening: if you find it to be just like a cyst, and it cannot be drained in any way, then cut into it as one cuts into a cyst, and treat it all the way to its core, if there is nothing else; and probe thoroughly, and heal it as it should be healed.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways of doing this, all of which I will describe to you. Now I must explain the difference between a dislocation and a fracture.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that discharge is continued fever, as long as the ebullition has not passed and the porridge is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With a fracture, there is no fever, pain, or swelling; it is a discolouration of the skin which is specific to the affected area and starts as a bruise that becomes larger. There are two types: one dry, one moist, and their colours vary as I have described in the classification.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the nose, that you test and inquire first with all the instruments which are called "forceps", according to what its shape will come to in the chapter which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	To probe an abscess, press on the softest spot you find and slowly push your finger in until you feel resistance from the pus, then remove your finger and look for pus to emerge. Continue this process according to the size of the abscess; then extract the pus with a instrument, taking care not to burst it.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If yellow pus emerges, treat it as described for other abscesses. If no pus comes out after probing, know that it is a solid mass; make an incision in the shape of a cross and grab it with tweezers, then lightly scrape away the surrounding skin and pull out the mass. If you cannot remove it all at once, cut it out piece by piece so that nothing remains inside.Et li nout de la cotte est selonc la color dou cors; si le corps est moiste, il est gras et blanc ou jaune ou noir; si le corps est sec, il est dur, sec, brun ou noir.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	If it remains unchanged, then the nose returns many times; and if a little of it remains, and the wound troubles you not, then employ some corrosive powders on the wound, and constrain the wound, and place upon it things that soothe an abscess hotly, and cure it with other cures until it is healed; and if the nose is large, then cut the two lips of the wound, and cure it with that which causes flesh to grow.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein beats against you or another, quickly apply ground vitriol and leave it for two or three days until the wound suppurates and the bleeding stops; then return to the cupping as before.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of cutting instruments for fistulas, and they come in three varieties: large, medium, and small; and there are three types of these, called 'albaret', one called 'breb', and there are also three types: large, medium, and small, according to the width of the openings.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of warts are very varied, as you can see: large, medium, and small; and some warts have two curves in three ways; and some have three curves and are also in three ways; and some have two curves, and warts with only one curve, and they are in three ways; and all of these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The heads of these tools are sharp, and some only cut from one side, so that the vein or nerve is not cut; and these intruded tools are placed in many places, so that the patient does not perish when opening abscesses; and there are three types: large, small, and medium, as you can see; and they are not used except in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and in similar places; and sometimes another small instrument is made, resembling a slice of a fig, according to this form, with which blood is stopped.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and they put it sometimes in the place that heals by cutting the veins, and the arteries, and sometimes they mend according to this large form;
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	At times the breasts of some men swell when they begin to become rotten, and appear like women's breasts; and they remain ugly and swollen. And if one wishes to cure them, then it is fitting that he should proceed according to this form from b to g .
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	then scrape off the fat and employ medicine on the wound in layers, then sew up the two lips of the wound, and treat it until it is healed. And if the breast sags down and becomes soft due to its size as happens with women, then split it into two at the top along two similar incisions; have one lip of one incision attached to the other at the end of both incisions so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from b to g. Then scrape off the skin between the two lips and remove the fat, and administer what we have said about sewing and powders, and whatever is necessary in the treatment until it is healed; but if it is not healed or the incision is not fully made due to the patient's discomfort or blood flow, then you must fill the wound with wet cotton saturated in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it consumes the remnant and the fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from under the armpits are like hard scrofula, and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus inside the abscess is drained, plug the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day. Then remove all the cotton and treat it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are like scrofula, then treat them as we have said for fissures of scrofula, and if the wound is closed, then apply cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	from the rupture of an artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is open and the skin above it, there often arise abscesses, and likewise in the vein is swollen and abscessed; and so one knows it when it is from the artery, for the abscesses are long and deep; and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel tugging; and when it is from the vein, there is a loss of feeling and swelling appears; and it is folly to cover this abscess, especially when it is beneath the armpits and on the arms and neck and in many other places, and it is large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, one must avoid the cautery of iron and that which is on top must also be avoided, and in that which is swollen from an artery, cut through the skin where the long vein is; then cut the artery away from the bones, and separate it from the veins, so that it is uncovered; then insert a needle underneath, and have it pierce all the way to the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I taught you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples; then tie off the place between the two threads with an introducer so that the blood within flows out and the abscess is relieved; then apply the cautery as if it were a bow, until the ligature slips; then cure this with ointment, and when it has healed, cure it again with tenting and ointments. And if the abscess is from the vein, you must dye your hand with what comes from the abscess to all of the skin, then insert another needle underneath where you are holding your hand, and have it pierce through, and tie a double thread to it, so that you draw it from the other side; then tie off the abscess, as I told you, at one of the two ends of the thread; and if you doubt that the thread will slip out, insert another needle underneath all of the abscess, at the incision of the first needle, and tighten the threads in three places; then cover the abscess so that the excess flows out, then cover the excess from the skin and leave what is tied; then place a moistened cloth in wine and oil, and administer tenting and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, as abscesses come in the artery and vein, they also come to the nerves when they are hurt, or through excessive exertion, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens most often in the shoulders and elbows and all over where there are joints, and it is a deep abscess, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in various states without pain; and when one presses on it firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not throughout the body but under the skin; and it is mute in all parts, and does not move forward or backward, or down or up, and that which is in joints should not be covered with iron: by chance there might be a contraction; and that which is on the head or forehead, treat with a poultice.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, grasp it with tweezers and cut off its root; and if it is large, pierce it with a needle, and scrape it out, then cut away the flesh and sew up the wound, and let it heal.
des grosses boces pendans	large boils hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	At times it occurs in bellies and nowhere else; it is a disease called 'mushroom' because of its resemblance to mushrooms: the roots are thin while the excreta are thick. There are small ones and very large ones. I saw a man who had two on his belly that looked more like mushrooms than anything else, with no difference between them; they were white and had thin roots, and were slightly split, and moisture ran from them.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I cut them and found one weighing 18 ounces and the other 6 ounces; the treatment for the incision is that you examine whether the disease is moist, and the color of the joint is white and moist with thin roots; then cup with a wide spatulum, and have the fire cautery ready in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For often there are excessive bloodlettings when cutting, and if the bleeding stops, then hasten to cauterize; and if you see the patient is frightened and fearful of the incision with the iron, then take a well-prepared thread and tie the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days; then restrain it, and do not stop tightening the thread until he cuts the joint, and it comes away without effort; and if the roots are thick, then be careful when cutting for the belly, but you can certainly cut half of it, then cauterize so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and beware of cutting the scrotum which is of a foul color and poor sensation and of milky appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the cure for cancers below.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil has burst
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the boil comes from cauterization of a wound or ulcer, and is on the abdomen and in some of the bowels, as it happens in other routs, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from wind; and if it is from the rout of the ulcer and from the discharge of the bowel, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a slight thing without pain, and it discharges in various ways.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestines, then it will be very diverse; and when pressed with the fingers, it retracts, and then returns, and sometimes it is constricted, and it increases in size at the entrance to the bath due to intense exertion.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a slight thing, and it opens well when you press it with your hand, nor does it constrain at all; and if it is due to blood, then the abscesses are large and hard, and they are fixed according to a quantity; and if it is due to wind, there is a sound when touched, and the actions indicate that you should look to see whether the appearance is due to blood from an artery or vein, or wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you need to let the wound heal.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	Because there is doubt and fear as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is in the intestine or bowels, then instruct the patient to tighten his belt and be stretched out straight, then sign all around the bump; then instruct him to lie still between your hands, then go around the area that you have marked all around the spasticity, then press down on half of the abscess above the large nail; then tie it tightly with a strong thread or strong silk rope, and let the patient's hand hang free; then open half of the abscess over the string, and insert your finger, and squeeze the intestine; if you find it caught in the string, release it, and squeeze the intestine out of the abdomen; and if you find the bowels, grab them at the nail and cut off the excess; and if the artery acts contrary, or the vein, then go around well, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two strong threads through them, and pierce what you have made in a cross so that you make a perforation; then squeeze the abscess in four places over the needles, and if you see any, remove the needles, and leave the wound as it is until it drains, and cut away the dead flesh by itself; or scrape it when it becomes thin and drainable, then treat the wound as needed, and cauterize the wound.
dou chancre	from which ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have described in the division of similarities of ulceration, and how one should work with medicines, and how one should avoid the cure of iron; and we speak of ulcer in the genitals, and great caution is required in its cure, and the ancients said that when ulcers are in places where they can be cut, such as ulcers in breasts, and in similar places, then all of it must be removed when it is in the beginning. And when it is large and old, one should not approach it at all, for I have never been able to heal any of them, nor has anyone ever healed them before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the work, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile sometimes; then make him bleed if he has manifest fullness; then open the wound .i. good place to do the work; then cut your oncines or cancer, and the head from all parts, and the bone from all parts without leaving anything; and let the blood flow out completely, and squeeze well the place with your hand or something, and if the bleeding makes you opposite to the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it until the blood vessels are burned; then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of hydropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already discussed the appearance of dropsy, and how the gathering of fluid occurs, as well as the signs of each appearance, and the treatment using medication, and that which is treated with iron. Only two types, tympany and hydrops, should be treated with iron; it is a dangerous procedure. Therefore, when treating this type of dropsy called "tympany" with medications, if the patient is weak or has other illnesses besides dropsy, such as constipation and similar conditions, do not use iron, as there is a risk involved. However, if the patient is strong and only suffering from dropsy, and is neither too young nor too old, proceed as follows: lift the patient upright, and press on the abdomen to force the fluid down towards the feet. Then, use the spathula with thorns according to this procedure:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let there be two parts to this.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And let there be two parts. And let it not be so sharp that it pierces all the way to the intestine when inserted, nor can it cause bleeding; then examine whether the hydropsy is pressed against the intestines: if it is due to liver disease, then make your incision on the left side of the armpit at a distance of three fingers; and if it is due to the spleen, then make the incision on the right side. And it is not necessary for the patient to lie on the incision so that the excess fluids do not flow towards the weaker area; then pierce the skin with your instrument, and insert it, and leave your hand on the spatumile between the skin and the syphilis as you would when skinning, to a depth of one fingernail or more; then pierce the syphilis until the spatumile comes out at the desired location, which is where the water is located, then pull it out and insert this instrument from which the mold will emerge.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	It is similar to a silver needle, and is made of bronze or lightweight brass, and has a small hole in the lower part; and on one side there are three holes, and two on the other, and one on each end; and the head is shaped like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes make when shaping a quill.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	at the top is the alamenum, so that when the instrument comes to a boil, it descends immediately upon the instrument; empty it therefore half or a third full, for if you empty more than is appropriate at that hour, by chance the patient may die from the shock of the liquid, or he may faint, or he may approach death; but empty it according to the quantity of his strength, and according to what the dispositions of the strength of the sick person indicate, and his pulse; then withdraw the instrument and hold the liquid, which is now held by the membrane that blocks the hole in the syringe, about which I have spoken, so you pierce it according to this manner; then reintroduce the instrument the next day if you see he can bear it, and withdraw a little liquid; do this every day, but be careful not to overdo it while there remains even a little liquid.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt the illness, let him drink a lot of water, and then use the cure of burial or hot sand, and through much sweating or bathing and in the sun, and if he becomes sick from drinking; and use medicines that dry up his body until he is healed, and cauterize his stomach and liver and spleen after the extraction of the water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the foreskin of the penis:
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born without a foreskin, or with a small one that is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If necessary, pierce it immediately with a very thin and sharp instrument according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then put a thin plug of lead into the opening and tie it there for three or four days, and when he wants to urinate, remove the plug and let him urinate, then replace the plug; but sometimes this is not necessary, because the urine that comes out will open the foreskin.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those whose hole is small, if they are treated with the plaster of lead white, as we have said, it will widen.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the hole in their place are bloated, because some are born with the hole at the tip of the penis, which prevents them from urinating before they lift their penis upwards; and they cannot ejaculate because the material cannot reach the glans, and this is a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the way to treat it is for the patient to lie on his back, then the tip and shaft of the penis are made as hard as a feather, with the opening in the middle, as it should be; and beware of bleeding that often occurs, and if it does, stanch it with what stanches blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of pimples on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times this albata occurs in the penis, and it is an ugly-looking swelling; there are both malignant and non-malignant ones; you should grab them with a pair of tweezers, pull them out carefully, then clean and dry them thoroughly, apply moistened cotton wool in Egyptian ointment, then treat the area with diaphenicon ointment until it heals.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, of pus color and foul-smelling, then you must apply cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cut it, and if the ulcer is on the shaft of the penis, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, then you must first remove the ulcer that is inside; and when it is healed, treat the one outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because when you treat it together, if the foreskin is not secured so that it is not pierced, and blackness and corruption come to the foreskin and the testicles; then all that is black and corrupt must be cut away, then apply the ointment of honey and flour made from pomegranate bark and vetches, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if there is bleeding, bring the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauteries help in two ways together: that is, for bleeding and corruption; and if the foreskin is infected and retracted, you must insert a tube into the urethra and let the patient urinate through it; and when the foreskin is sore at the tip of the penis, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or due to a wound or an abscess, then you must cut it with an instrument made of lead, until the foreskin is separated from the glans and is completely freed from the penis; and if it is a serious matter to discuss this, then you should cut it with a spatula made of some soft metal at the tip of the penis and the skin; then separate them gently, and place a thin linen cloth wet in cold water between them so that it does not become sore again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not like other wounds in terms of healing; however, when we perform this procedure intentionally, especially on infants, it is necessary to do it properly and gently for their well-being.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancient authors did not describe the circumcision of their children because they did not practice it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experimentation.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Because I have seen most of the masters and surgeons who performed circumcision all around the glans, and in some cases even cut off the foreskin entirely; this caused the skin to dry out and form a scar, as there were two membranes, and sometimes the upper one was removed while the lower one remained.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Then they cover it again, and the pain is doubled, and with the washing of the glans, which is not healed at the tip of the member; and in washing the nail, sometimes the instrument slips, and they injure the work, and many times they grow back so that they don't need to be washed, and I have seen this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the washing that is done around the glans, I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut accurately both above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because when you press your hand, you cut it evenly into the entire soul; but let the thread be tightly wound around the skin; and the manner of the first work is that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only tying the thread around the wand, and then you make him stretch in all the ways you can; then make him stand between your hands straight up, and support his weight with your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, or any of the instruments; then place your hand on the wand and breathe into the heart, and draw it upwards until the head of the wand is inside; then cleanse it well of the dirt that has accumulated there, then tie the place marked with a double thread, then tie it under the other end; hold it with both hands by the second bond at the pouch and the index finger, and press between the two bonds, then lift the heart quickly and draw the head of the wand; then let the blood flow little by little, for that is the wound; and put powder on top of the powder, a cloth glued with an egg cooked in rose water, confit with good and fresh rosemary oil, and leave it until the next day, and cure it again and again until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The shape of the forceps for cleansing should be as follows: the two heads should be thin and sharp, and the handles should be as wide as the palm of the hand equally.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The mistake in cleansing is when the glans slips inside during incising; therefore, you must stretch it with your nail so that the glans makes an abscess; then, press equally and if you cannot hold it with your nail, hold it with tweezers, then press.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it persists for 3 days, and that which is under the foreskin is swollen, let it be until the hot abscess is soothed and the skin is lightly scratched; then copulate as much as you can, being careful not to touch the foreskin, this will do him no harm.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat therefore the area of sudden wounds with powder, as we have said in the treatise on powders, and if he copulates beyond measure, and it goes above, it will do no harm; treat it therefore, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	from the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to a stone, or congelated blood, or a tumor, or similar conditions that we have described in the division; and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is caused by the stone lodged at the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent forward at the waist, with his feet placed on his back, and his abdomen pressed down from above the back, and he should strain as hard as he can; thus the neck of the bladder will be forced upward to expel the stone, and the urine will be released. If it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer an extraction using a syringe, which is called a "syringe". It should be made of thin silver like a bird's feather; its tube should be a palm and a half long, and thin at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the way of the issue of urine is that you take a double thread and tie it to the head with a little wool or cotton, and insert the end of the thread into the syringe; then squeeze out the excess wool and fill the syringe to the top, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg white; have the patient sit on a chair, and lubricate the bladder and penis with moist oil, olive oil, and warm water; then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then double the penis over towards the scrotum; next, fill the syringe all the way to the bladder, and feel the patient urinate until the bladder is empty; if this is not done in this order, but according to another method, then the person guiding the stream is wrong; then pull out the thread through the wool, and let the urine run through the wool; then remove it, and pass the urine; then reinsert the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scabs or blood come in the bladder, or pus is accumulated there, and you see water and medicine dripping from it, then do this with all the apparatus that is called a "clepsydra", and this is how:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed and has three openings: two on one side and one on the other, as you can see; and the medicine-carrying tube through which the medicine is applied should be such that it blocks the urethra without addition, so that if moisture can be extracted, and pushed when necessary; and when you see your medicines moving in the bladder, put the tip of the catheter into the moisture and draw it along, so that the moisture will enter the catheter and then return to the bladder, so that the patient feels it; and this is the form of the subtle catheter by which one catheters the bladder: thus it is:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is made of silver or bronze, and the tip is higher up; and underneath there is a testicle or a scrotum; then take a sheep's bladder and put in it the moisture by which you want to catheterize the bladder, then tie it between the two testicles with a strong double thread, and heat this moisture over the fire; then insert the tip of the catheter into the urethra, then apply your hand to the bladder to draw all the moisture in smoothly, so that the patient feels that this moisture has reached the bladder; and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle, and pierce it all around; then insert the thread tightly through these openings, then assemble the circle as one assembles a shield, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and attach it to the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, by squeezing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	of stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already discussed in the division the ways of stone, and its extraction along with medicines; and I have described the difference between a stone lodged in the bladder, and all the signs, and in which type of stone one should operate: in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder occurs most often in children, and it is a sign that the water flows from the bladder, resembling water in its subtlety; and it causes pain to the patient, and he grasps his penis, and can urinate many times, and then it blocks; and many of these cause the foundation [of the body]; and healing is easier for children until they are 4 years old, and it is much more serious in the elderly, and it is midway between youth and old age; and the cure is generally easier for those who have larger stones than for those with smaller ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema, to draw out all the feces that are in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it sometimes clogs up while seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet and make him stand up and move around so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it comes out from the top; then have him sit between your hands, with his hands under his thighs, so that the bladder is completely tilted downward; then examine and feel inside; if you feel the stone in the passage, hurry now to cut on the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not come out with just the touch, then wet your index finger of the left hand with oil, if the patient is an adult, or with your middle finger if the patient is a young person; and insert it into his anus, and examine for the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, pull it toward the neck of the bladder; then press against it with your finger, and move it away from where you intend to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the minister to press on the bladder with his hand, and tell him to lift up the testicles with his right hand, and with his left hand pull back the skin underneath the testicles in the area where the incision is made; then insert the spatulum firmly, following its natural curve.Et s’il sent la piere a son doi indice ou moien, si quier la piere avec li spatumile et li boutons dedens, et quant il la sens, si l’amoine vers le col de la vessie;
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And they cut between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the side of the left buttock; and it should be straight over the stone, and both hands should be pressed against the anus, and the incision should be made across the navel so that it is wide on top and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large; perhaps it presses on the hand which is against the anus, so that it pops out without any effort. And you will find that there is a kind of stone with angles and edges, which is hard to remove; and there is another type which is underneath, resembling a gland, and round, whose extraction is easier.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And for those with angles and edges, make the incision larger; and if it does not come out, then you must grip it with forceps which are like a file at the tip, to pull out the stone so that it does not slip away; or you push underneath with a thin instrument curved at the end; and if you cannot grab it thus, then widen the opening and pour vinegar inside, and if there is more than one stone, first insert the largest one into the neck of the bladder, then press in from above, then pull it out, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are several.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, it must be sutured, and a larger wound made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either he dies or his urine comes out through the place where the urethra cannot heal; but nevertheless, try to pull it out with tweezers until you have extracted it in pieces; and when you have finished your work, smear the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and compress it, and place a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, over the abscess to soothe the hot swelling; then re-insert the catheter into his penis, and do not remove the ligature until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, then wash the site well with oil and water, then treat the wound with thin ointment and thick ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if hot abscesses and corrosions of blood come into the wound and the bladder is blocked by this so that urine cannot pass through it in a healthy manner: then press your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains there, it will corrupt the bladder and cause it to protrude; then wash the wound with water and vinegar and celery seed, and treat him in all the ways you know until he is healed; and it is necessary that every day that you dress his wound, you bind his two thighs together, and assemble the remedies over the affected area.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small and it is in the urethra, and lodged in it, so that urine cannot pass; then the treatment of what I have said before serves as an excuse for cutting many times.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have experienced this myself.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take an iron rod according to this form and let it be filed into three angles:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the penis under the stone, so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then push the needle into the penis gently, until it reaches the stone; then turn the needle in your hand within the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side; then urine will flow at once, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is broken at once and comes out with the urine, then the patient is cured; and if you cannot do this for any reason that causes it to come out, then tie a thread under the stone and another above it, then cut into the penis towards the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and untie the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of the stones of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	Sometimes stones form in women, and if they do, the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a skilled woman who reveals herself to midwives, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman well skilled in this art of medicine; and the fourth way is that the woman's stone is more deeply embedded than a man's, so it requires a deeper incision, and there is great fear involved. And if necessity demands it, then you should take a midwife who is well skilled, and with difficulty pierce her, and if you cannot pierce her, then do not want to use a very subtle needle; and present her with a cupping glass that is well-made for the treatment of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command in the examination of the stone; and look very carefully to see if the woman is a virgin. Then she should insert her finger into the opening and search for the stone; and if she finds it, then hold it under her finger, and recommend that she inserts her finger where the pain is located, and press her left hand firmly on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she has a hernia, she should move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder down to the root of the thigh; then press on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the groin, where the stone is located and feels tender; do not move your finger above or below the stone, and make the incision small at first. Then open the wound as wide as you can sense the stone, so that it can come out; know that there are many types of stones: small ones, large ones, smooth ones, sharp ones, long ones, round ones, and those with rays.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	And if you know their appearances in order to identify the cause.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if you feel any bleeding, put crushed vitriol over the spot and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your work so that the stone can come out, and have some of the instruments I told you about earlier for extracting stones from men to assist you in your task. If you feel bleeding, and it is from a cut artery, put the powder on the spot and constrict it with bandages and cloth; do not apply anything else, leave the stone alone, and do not try to pull it out or the patient may die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the site has healed, return to your work until the stone is removed.
de hernie carnouse	of carnous hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Aquous fluid is nothing else but an assembly of moisture or white pus, which is beneath the heart of the testicles, containing the egg; and is called "pus", and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that it is another egg; and that is the skin of the testicle between the white pus that we have mentioned. And this does not happen rarely.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this disease is due to weakness that comes to the testicles, and that matter is spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture has many colors; sometimes it is a yellow complexion, sometimes red-less, sometimes black, sometimes watery white, and so on; and these are the signs by which we know this condition, for if it is in the white syphilis that we have described, then the abscesses are ready, small like the shape of an egg, and they do not appear on the testicles because there is moisture all around them.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the skin itself, then the abscesses are ready with part of an egg, and so one thinks it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white syphilis, then he feels good; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, test all over the scrotum, for its shape is as described above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this then, what comes after the entrance, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, the patient should be healed according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then he lies on his back on something slightly raised, and many layers of cloth are placed under him; then he sits up, and the assistant sits opposite on the right, and the rod is extended to one of the two ribs below the heart; then take the spatulum and gently lift the skin of the ribs from their tips all the way to the armpit, and the split should be straight as you lift the ribcage skin up to the white part of the shoulder blade, and scrape gently according to your strength; then pierce the shoulder blade with a large hole, and draw out all the water, and then put in your fingers, and press the shoulder blade upwards; and do not touch the ribs, only the shoulder blade; gently lift the ribcage all around just as much as you can, for if you do not lift it well, the water will return; and if an egg is damaged in your work, return it to its place when you have finished the work on the shoulder blade; then sew the two edges of the ribs together with one stitch, then cure it like other wounds until it heals.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find that the testicle is corrupted by another disease, then you must ligate the vessels which are suspended, fearing a rupture of blood; then cut the scrotum all around the suspension, extract the testicle and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the water is collected in two parts together, know that they are two blisters; then cup the other part as you did the first, equally, then wipe away the blood and put on the wound soft lamb's wool moistened with rose oil; and moisten another piece of lamb's wool with wine and oil, and place it over both blisters, and place doubled linen over them, and bind it firmly all around according to this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two pieces of linen and stuff them with lamb's wool according to this pattern, and sew them together at the crotch of the breeches, and let one piece hang over the anus onto the back, and the other onto the perineum; and let both ends hang over the two angles, and tie all around the buckle of the breeches firmly. Sometimes this blister is treated with a cautery instead of cutting with iron, and it is done by grasping a small, thin cautery knife, and scorching the skin of the blisters, so that the white pus contained in the water is exposed; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that pus at the edges, and scorch it with this thin hot cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the cup in every way that you can, as long as you stretch everything out; and be careful not to let the fire touch the egg; and know that this work is safer; and move carefully to avoid blood flow, and changes that affect the wound; and if anything contradicts this, whether it is an abscess or blood flow or anything else, then cure what contradicts it according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this treatment due to its horribleness, then prepare for incision as I have told you; it is necessary for the patient to sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the lower part, throughout the spatulum, and insert the incision deeply into the body; make the holes wide so that all the pus can flow out; then place cotton over the area, and bandage it, and let the remaining pus drain out, and then cure the wound until it is healed; and if the white membrane does not allow the pus to flow out through the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a feather or the instrument used to treat hydrops, of which the shape has been described earlier; widen the wound, and know that the pus will return, and be re-absorbed after six months or so, and when it is re-absorbed as before, and thus the patient's condition will improve over time.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles:
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the dissection of this armpit there are many dispositions of fear, because of which I think it is better to leave it alone. And I will tell you the operation and the appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I therefore say that many abscesses come in the body, especially in the testicles; and this happens in many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to be known through an abundance of bitterness and ague, which is spread throughout the body, or from a blow; and the color of the abscess follows the color of the body; and it does not subside in pain, and it is a grave abscess; and sometimes there are dark, fearful, and piercing abscesses, and a flowing color, and at times it comes from a rupture of an artery, or from inflammation of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from a rupture of an artery, it is known by the warm disposition of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and you must not touch it.Quant c’est par enfleure de voine, il est conus par la coler del aposteme; et li color vairent, si com il vait a la coler del corps; et covient que tu le mettes a tuit repos et a tuit grant calm; et ne covient mie que tu le fesses bouillir, ne l’enleves en aucun manier.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Those who are affected by inflammation of the vein are known by their appearance and the sensation when touched with the fingers; anyone can then make a diagnosis based on this examination and similar examinations of other parts of the body. You should examine the color of the eyelids, then lift the eyelid to expose the eyeball, and note any white film over the eyeball.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the eyeball is already affected by these symptoms, then you must treat the eyeball and the eyelid; if there is a film over the eyeball or within the blood vessels, then you must remove all of that film and smooth out the surface.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the growth is in the back, then you must cut it all out and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is finished, then dress the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles:
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a swelling that resembles a grape, with the softening of the eyelids, and when the patient blinks, it causes great pain; the treatment for this condition is very similar to the previous one, and although we will describe its procedure according to the methods of the ancients, it is a very dangerous treatment.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary for you to make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then tie the suspensory of the testicles down with your fingers, pressing all the vessels that are near the penis, and tighten them, then cut through the vessels with a sharp knife, widely and directly, until they are exposed, and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries in the temples; then insert a needle where there is a double thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein appeared, and tie it directly to the other end; then pull them gently, following the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisture; then cure the wound as with the others, or insert a bowstring, so that any vessel that is cut off from the testicles does not lose its nourishment due to the cutting of the vessels, and dry up and cannot heal.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rot of the eye socket
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The occurrences of this hernia are through the incision that comes from the scrotum, or the extension over the abdomen in the region of the inguinal canal, causing the intestines to descend from that passage to one of the groins; and this passage is at the level of the scrotum, or from its extension, and these two types of hernia come from many causes: from a blow, or jumping, or coughing, or lifting a heavy load, and similar activities. The signs when it is from an extension of the scrotum are that it happens gradually over a long time, and does not come on suddenly; and the hernias are equal in size up to the depth, because the scrotum presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the sign is when it is from dysentery, that it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses are various appearances below the skin, and it is due to the exit of the intestine and the body's defense against dysentery.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the peritonitis is retained inside, and it causes great suffering to the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cures of iron there is fear, which is why one should avoid it.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the method of treatment is to instruct the patient to push the intestine back into the wound with his hand if he can; then hold the scrotum between your hands and lift the buttocks; then press the abdomen down, and grab all the skin of the groin from the top; then insert the hooks of the retractor into the incision according to what you need in order to open the wound, and make it so that the aorta can come out; then scrape off the scrotum under the skin of the testicles, until the tough white scrotum is exposed all around; then put your index finger into the scrotum behind one of the testicles, into what is between the white scrotum under the skin of the testicle and between the second scrotum, and separate what is behind the testicle and between the second scrotum; then move your right hand inside the scrotum, and hold the white scrotum up in your left hand, and lift the testicle with all the scrotum towards the abdomen; and instruct an assistant to stretch the testicle upwards, and untie what is behind the bandage; then feel with your fingers if there is any intestine wrapped around the tough white scrotum, and if you find anything, pull it back into the abdomen; then take a needle with a thick thread made from ten fibers, and insert it into the back part of the scrotum, which is behind the skin of the testicles; after the incision, grab the parts of the threads, so that there are four threads; then tie them together in a cross shape, and tie the scrotum with a strong ligature in two places; then wrap the thread around the scrotum tightly, so that none of the blood vessels that nourish it can pass through, so that no hernia occurs; then put the ligature according to the first long ligature two fingers from that one, and after these two ligatures leave a space of a finger's width in the scrotum behind the testicle; then grab the part under the skin of the scrotum, as we said before, so that the blood flows, and treat the wound with soft wool soaked in oil; then put on the ligature as we said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white syphilitic sore which we have described is cauterized after an incision out of fear of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and let the wound bleed as much as it can; and if it is slow to heal, then use hot water, and apply what we have said until it heals; then cure the wound with another cure, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of carnous hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this remedy I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients say that it is done like the ramie which is tied together with the vis, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after cutting above gently to the bottom; then coppice with myrrh, and cure the abscess with what works, until the vessels heal; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes the rut comes out in the veins, as we have said, and opens the place; and no intestines come out into the bowels, and if any do, it is a little, and repair every hour; and nevertheless if he stays too long in this state, he believes the wound or the fistula, so that the intestines come out; and this happens because of the extension of the fistula which is in the veins, as we have said, for it extends, then becomes soft and swollen at the place and opens; and its cure is by cautery, as we have previously said; and sometimes it is cured by iron in this way: and the patient lies down on his back between your hands, then coppice the rut that is swollen with salt according to the quantity of three eggs; and then draw out the fistula which is under the skin, then take the thread and place it over the apparent place of the fistula; and press it deeply into the abdomen, then cut the two apparent places of the fistula on the top of the thread, and cut one and the other; then pull out the top of the thread, and do not cover the fistula or extend the egg or anything else, as I have made you aware in the cure of a rupture of the intestines; then cure it by the cure of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, cleanse and treat the wound until it heals.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The ulcer is constrained, and has no appearance in the wound, and cautery is effective in this case, and closer to safety.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the scrotum
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the scrotum softens in some men due to the testicles within becoming softened, and it is milky in appearance; and when one wishes to treat it, they should make the patient lie on his back, and cut the softened skin on the skin of the scrotum; then bring together the two edges with a single stitch, or at most two or three stitches, firmly; then cut between the stitches, and treat it as you would other wounds, until it is healed, and remove the sutures.
dou chastrement	of chastisement
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	You should know that castration is condemned by our law, and for this reason I would prefer not to discuss it in this book. However, there are two reasons why knowledge of it is necessary: the first is so that the doctor can answer questions about it and know how to perform the procedure; the second is because we often need to castrate certain animals to help us, such as bulls, rams, horses, and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that castration is done in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting.Atraction se fait a l’aide d’un fer chaud et d’un cautere; la fendure, en coupant avec un couteau.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In that which we do by attraction, we make the animal sit in hot water so that its testicles are softened and hanging down; then squeeze them with your hand until they are put back into place and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	On castration: you must tie the animal down, and press the scrotum with your left hand, then tie the suspenders, and cut on each testicle, once you have cut them well; and leave some pus of the syphilis and the subtle syphilis which is over the vessels; and this method of castration is better than that done by attraction, because with attraction something of the testicles might remain, causing the animal to desire lust; then treat the wound until it heals.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways in males: one is that between the testicles there appears something like the form of nature of a woman, and it has hair, and sometimes urates.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is in women, and has above the wrist as a rod and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment of men and women is to cut off the scrotum, and treat it like any other wound; in the second manner, for men whose semen leaks through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the tentigenes
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	A hernia is an external swelling above the natural part, so large that it is ugly to look at; and some women have them as large as a hand, and that is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	You should dye the excess of the hernia with your hand or a knife, and cut it slightly; and do not cut too deep so that bleeding does not occur, then treat one wound with another cure until it is healed; and for a swelling that occurs in the mouth of the vagina, use it, and perhaps it will burst, and it is like the appearance of a cow, and because of this the ancients called it the "cow disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you need to treat it, as we have said before, treat the wound until it is healed.
de erratique	of erratics
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	It is erratic when the nature of the woman is not understood, or the passage is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental due to illness that comes to it; or it is caused by a foreign object, or a sottish or thick suppuration, and is formed deep in the body, or on the sides, or underneath, or wherever it may be; and they should understand conception and childbirth, and perhaps flowers to have; and the knowledge of this is through the observation of the dance.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the wound is nearby, appear with your fingers or on a rod.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is from a sottish suppuration and is nearby the lips, do this: place your two index fingers together, and let the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then form the lips, so that the sottish suppuration is pierced, and cover the wound; then take wool, moisten it in oil, and place it on the spot, and let the woman lie at home every day so that it may not close up.Si la piere est en le costez de l’estomac, et li membres sont dislocuez:
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the syphilis is hard and thick, you must cut it with the spatula like a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is of fresh flesh, then stop the bleeding and cut it; and have blood-stopping medicines like acacia, dragon's blood, incense, and egg white; then apply a wide bandage of loose linen so that the wound cannot heal; and let this be for a long time, and then apply a tent of dry linen; then treat with other treatments until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when fresh flesh appears in a wound, it must be cut in this way, unless it is an abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For one must not cut at an abscess that is within a wound.Et li apotemes qui sont en la marris ne doit on point coper selonc ceste maniere; mes covient les fendre si com dis, et li estrainer le pu pour que li sang ne fuie.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings in veins from which blood flows habitually, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hard; and we have already said in the division their likenesses to hawks, and the signs, and I will now say those that receive a cure.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and hard hemorrhoids, when they are emp[er]f[ect] in the anus, and do not appear to the sense [of sight], except for the cure by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those which are at the mouth of the anus, one can feel; they are those that can be cured.Li thelul et li emorroides qui sont desous la marris, il n’a pas de cure, si n’est par fer.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	One must then place the woman in a cold room, and heat the bed with tongs, and the pillow at its roots; then powder over restraining medicines such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then bind her feet to the wall for an hour, then place her in cold water; and if bleeding ensues, have her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate rind and galls and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and garlic, and make a poultice over her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, have her breathe in steam from the back and breasts without burning; then take wool, and moisten it in plantain juice or dogwood juice mixed with old wine, and apply it to the area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has subsided, treat the area with ointment until it heals; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles rough skin, so it should be covered as I have said with a bandage; and then treat it until it heals.
des apostemes de la marris	of absesses in the anus:
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses occur in the head, such as ulcers and pimple-like abscesses, and herpes, and estafettes, and fistulas, and hemorrhoids, and hot abscesses, and several other diseases which I have described in the divisions.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore, it is necessary that I describe in this treatise the hot abscess which occurs in the head; for there are many kinds of abscesses that burst in the bowels: and if you wish to know about iron treatment, observe whether the abscesses are hard at the beginning of their appearance, and filled with heat and fever, and whether they turn red when you look at them.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore, do not rush to pierce it, but let the pain subside first; then have the patient sit on a chair, and have two small seats for him to lean on, one on each side, and have him support his back and bend his legs to the sides; let his buttocks be spread apart, and have him place his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good bandage. Then suck the wound towards the right rib, and administer the instrument used to open the wound, from which the pus will come out afterward; you must insert the rod first to determine the depth of the wound so that what goes into the wound does not go in too deep and cause bleeding or hurt the patient; if the instrument is larger, cover the depth of the wound with cloth so it does not irritate him. Have him hold the nozzle of the instrument above and breathe into the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscesses open, and they are made by the soft hand, then they should be covered with the head, or with the spatumile lead; and when the bowels are emptied, then you should put into the wound moist tents in rose oil, or in dry green oil; and place the tent outside the wound at the bottom of the injury, and place over the injury and over the small clean lamb's wool moistened in water or malva flowers that have been cooked; then heal after two days of ointment, until it is healed; and sometimes raise the injury and the wound by enema of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lilies and aristolochia that have been cooked for a long time; then return to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is pushed back into the injury, then you should be careful to cook with iron, but heal it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	It is necessary first for the midwife to know the natural shape of childbirth, and the signs, which are when you see the woman push downward and desire to smell flowers; then the child rushes to be born; then you know that this childbirth follows nature's design, and the afterbirth comes out with the child, and the mother is cleansed of her excess fluids through proper cleansing; and those who come in a different way are not born naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For sometimes the child comes out feet first, or through the chest or shoulder, or the arms, or through the belly or back; and it can also get stuck in the neck and be delivered in various other bad positions; therefore the midwife must be wise and cunning in such matters, and beware of mistakes and disappointments, and I will show you all the different positions and how to assist.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out head first in a natural way, and the woman gives birth painfully, and her strength is weak, then let her sit on a stool or be held by women; and let her drink the juice of roasted oil or fenugreek, and then let the midwife insert the little spatulum, of which I will now describe the form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and cut the naches, and press on its nail until the moisture that is inside flows out; and press the belly of the woman until the child comes down, and if it does not come down, then the woman must be enema with a mixture of fenugreek and oil of six mint; then make her press and sneeze with condisi, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now let the child come out.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if both hands come out, then you must gently reset them little by little; and if they cannot go in, put the woman on a chair, and lift her feet up; then stand the chair on the ground, and hold one hand on the woman so that she does not shit while standing; and if the hands cannot go in, and the child is dead, then grip the hands with the knife which was mentioned before, and extract the child, and reset likewise.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the child giving birth on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child is born on its feet, it should be pushed up; and then it is turned little by little until it is straightened out; then grab it by the feet and extend it little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps up to its hips, instruct it to be grabbed, and make it sneeze from the neck; if it jumps out, God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it doesn't jump as we have said, then move it little by little until it returns to its natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it will be easy.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come out as we have described, take musk, rose oil, and gum dissolved, and grind everything in a mortar; then put this ointment on the mother's navel and let her sit in warm water up to her ribs; and when she is soft down there, put the myrrh collar around her waist and leave it for an hour; then have her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and squeeze her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for now the child will come out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the child's delivery upon his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, the midwife should gently place her hands on the child's back; then she should lie the child on its side, with its feet hanging down, and let it lie on its bed; and she should gently bend its hands, and then press its hands onto its belly, and lift up its bottom, so that it is facing downwards; and if the child does not cry out, she should take its feet and move them about, and then move its belly upwards, and push in with her hands; and she should rock the child gently; and she should tell the woman to hold on until the child emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the baby's birth, which comes out wide enough for one hand to pass through
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I will describe how to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, then make the woman stand up and walk; if she cannot walk, then let her sit on the bed, and raise her legs straight up; then apply the medicine that I have described; and if she does not give birth, then let her sit on a chair, and then try to bring back the hand; and deliver the child in its natural position, and make her sneeze, and tell her to hold on until the child emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the emergence of the child above his neck, and has his hands spread out, and his face turned towards his mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I want the patient to hold his hand still, then slowly turn it and move it slightly; and when it is even, he should apply a poultice of mustard and oil, as we have said, then instruct him to move it slowly; and when you have done this, have him sit on a chair, and instruct him to clap his hands; and make him sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same way for all of the afterbirth
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes out in this way all over the body, then scoop up the afterbirth with your fingers until the fluids are expelled; and if the baby sticks to his mother's face and neck, scrape it off so that it is not retained and the baby dies; then put the baby back inside, making sure he is placed as he should be, and instruct the woman to clap her hands a few times: then gently pull on it.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the exit of the twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens rarely.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	They are strange creatures, and do not live if they are touched; I know that they multiply, and are separated by the wind which blows them, and are attached to the earth; and sometimes they issue forth as naturally as a tail, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they emerge strongly, then the surgeon must act quickly and skillfully as we have said, and make the incisions subtly, and do whatever is necessary for healing.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the sea as one, two, three, four, five, six, or seven, and sometimes more, up to fifteen, and they are all shaped like children according to the measurement of the glorious sage, and the surgeon must know this because a similar thing might happen to him; so he should act accordingly.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat a woman for a dead child or a swollen belly, as I have said in the section on obstetrics, and there is no progress, and you must resort to manual extraction; then you should know if the woman is of sound health and does not have any fear of death; then you should make her lie on her back with her head tilted downward and her legs lifted up; and the surgeon should apply the ointment to two parts, or have her lie in bed so that she is not pulled down by the child; then rub the mouth of the womb with moist oils infused with myrrh, fenugreek, and flax seed, then anoint the surgeon's hands with these oils and unguents; then insert the fingers gently into the womb, and touch the places where the child is expected to emerge; if the child is positioned for a head delivery, insert the finger into the vagina or anus, or under the jaw, or along the sides of the throat, or under the beard, or in the armpit, or near the ribs, or the hip joints; and he should apply the ointment to his right hand and place the bandage between his fingers on his left hand, and insert his hand gently, and touch the places we have mentioned, until he reaches the empty space; and this is the shape of the finger:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	then pierce into the other joint, or the third, if you need it, so that the extraction is even; and then they are even as they move from one side to another, for them to come out, and the joints bite to hold them in place, as is the form.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if some part remains, then anoint the joint with oil, and put it in that part, and pull out the other part; and if nothing remains, then put this joint or a higher one, and do this until everything comes out strong.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be pulled back because of the tightness, then you must wrap it with a cloth until it comes out; then put the hook in the joint of the wrist or the elbow, and so you should do to the other hand and to the feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the child's head is large and it is constricted in the birth canal, or if there is a sharp pain gathered at the top, then you must use the spiny spatula between your fingers, and pierce the head and extract the fluid; or draw it out with the instrument called "almidach", from which the mold comes with the instruments in the chapter that follows this one; and likewise do if the child has a large natural head; and then pull out the bones with tongs, and if the head pops out and is forced, it will split, so that the moisture that is in the birth canal comes out; and if it cannot come out, then pierce it in pieces as much as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce it so that the moisture runs out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the swelling is above his feet, then the pull is light, and the direction to the mouth of the wound is easy.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	If it is constricted in the abdomen or foot, you should loosen it with the hand wrapped in a cloth; and open up the abdomen or foot so that the moisture inside can flow out; if other parts are stuck and the bowels remain, put his hand into the wound and pull it out to the mouth of the wound; then he inserts the thumb or two fingers and pulls outward; if the mouth of the wound is constricted by a hot abscess that has formed there, one should not work on it, but apply moist and greasy substances; one can also administer poultices, and use warm and soothing water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	If the child is on its side and you can get it to lie down flat, then treat it as we said for a living child; if one cannot do this, pull it out in pieces, leaving nothing behind of the afterbirth.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if the patient is suffering from abscesses that occur in the bowels, and bleeding occurs, then it should be restrained with water, and other remedies administered.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly an infant had died, then another was sewn onto her, and the other one died too.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, she got an abscess in her armpit, which swelled so much that it opened, and began to discharge a lot.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the cure, and I thought long and hard, but could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong attractive plaster, and out came a bone, and after a few days some more.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very amazed, for I thought that bellies did not have bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I examined the wound and found bones inside, until the woman was in a better state; and she lived like this for a long time, and then she died of an illness from that place; and I only remembered this chapter because when a master encounters something strange, he should know how to provide aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	how to reset the dislocation to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Hereafter comes the form of the press, to which one adds the books; and at .2. turns of .2. knees of .2. lines.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle than the constrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the tool should be two fingers wide, and its edges should be rounded, and one palm and a half long; and in both sides there should be two adjustments of this same wood, which are fixed in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more; and these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the wound to open it when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, with a more subtle and lighter appearance, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of tongs; and has two adjustments on each jaw, as you see, one palm-length long, and two digits wide; and when you see open the wound by all the instrument, then let the woman lie on her bed, with her feet hanging and her legs spread, then close the two adjustments together in the wound, and hold the head of the instrument underneath between her thighs; then work your hand on the whole instrument, as you have done with tongs similarly, according to the amount that you see open the mouth of the wound, until the midwife does what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all decorated, and they have many similarities; and when the practitioner has prepared them, the action is more rapid and higher in status among people due to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despair over the instrument until you have prepared it, for their necessity is inexcusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath and then sneeze forcefully, and squeeze your hands over her mouth and nose; and if she vomits through this action, that is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, take a pot and make an opening in the lid, and place herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, such as comfrey, rue, anis, camomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked in water over fire; then put one end of a tube into the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the wound, and apply it so that the vapors enter the wound; then make her sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	Then remove the pus gently.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if she still has it after this treatment and it does not go away, instruct the midwife to moisten her left hand with oil of sesamum or with a poultice of alder, and then place it in its natural state, and seek out the secondine; and when she finds it, she should grasp and stretch it gently little by little, so that the wound does not hurt on extraction; but she must move it slightly to the right and left, and then pull; it will come out and be dislodged.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the opening of the wound is narrow, we have spoken of the treatment of sneezing and of the fume of herbs; and if it is not from anything that we have said, be careful that you do not fool around with the enema; but it is appropriate that what is at the mouth of the wound, that you tie it to the thigh of the woman, then cleanse it with a four-drug ointment; then she will defecate and recover, and come out; but nonetheless, when she defecates, an evil odor comes to the stomach and head, and injures the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	So you should use suitable fumigations: some of the ancients have tried fumigation with watercress and dry figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The instrument used to fumigate the woman for retained afterbirth is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	It is like glass in appearance, and the thin end is placed in nature, and the wide ends are placed over the fire; and the fume is applied to the charcoal, and the wart until it is waste, and another begins.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the fundament
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have the foreskin pierced, but the penis is blocked by a thin membrane; so it is necessary that at the baptismal font, she pierces this membrane with her fingernail, and does not pierce it with a needle, and leave the bandage so that it does not touch it; then place it in milk moistened with wine and oil, then treat it with ointment until it heals.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will heal, insert a wooden peg into the hole and leave it for several days, then remove it when the child wants to move around.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this stemming comes from a wound or abscess suddenly; so it must be stopped suddenly: then it should be treated as we have said with the wooden peg.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the fistula of the fundament
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from under the anus are nodules, and grow larger than those that come from within the anus, or in the space between the two parts, whether there is one fistula or several; and when this nodule becomes old, it opens, and usually discharges a white or thin pus, and sometimes these fistulas are piercing; they are perceived by what comes out of them, either through defecation or flatulence, and sometimes a little jumps out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that pierce all the way to the bladder, and halfway down the penis; and they can reach the joint of the thigh, and all the way to the scrotum.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows a piercing fistula in the anus, and not a non-piercing one; it is when you push your finger into the anus, and insert a thin needle made of bronze or iron into the fistula when there is no bending.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has bending, insert a thin tent made of lead or horsehair into the fistula until you feel the tent or hair at your finger; and if you do not feel it, and nothing comes out through the opening, either defecation or flatulence, as we have said, then know that it does not pierce; so hurry to cure it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula penetrates up to the bladder or the urethra, urine leaks out and cannot be stopped by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced as far as the joint of the thigh, then the vein will flow as far as the spot; if there is a kink and the pain is felt around, then it will bend there, and ointments and remedies will not help; in these persisting fistulas, there is no cure but labor and the vanity of foolish remedies that are applied.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In one that is not persisting and is not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced; the patient lies on his back, and you lift his legs up to his thighs, and bend his thighs toward his belly; then pierce a vein with an iron rod, or with lead if there is a kink, until you know where the vein is.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it in the buttocks, then you must push your index finger in there, if without feeling that the vein has pierced through; and it should be exposed where you feel the swelling or the flesh, then you know it is persisting; one should not work on it unless they can heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One can nonetheless heal some of them, although this rarely happens; and the aid one provides is to scorch the cautery sutilly according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before; and pour it all hot into the fistula, until it reaches the rectum; and do this two or three times, until you know that these falsified hairs have been burned, which look like a bird's feather; and then treat with tented moistened wool, until those hairs come out; then treat with ointment to join and seal.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus healed, that is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it cannot be healed otherwise; and if the tent goes in and does not pierce all the way to the rectum, but there is between your finger and the tent a thick covering of pus or of syphilitic material, and you see the fistula following under the covering towards the anus; then cut off at the beginning of the fistula, and pour in before the tent, and then cauterize afterwards, until it reaches the head of the tent; and the tent will be released, and fall out; then pluck out those falsified hairs that look like a bird's feather, and none will remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the pus flows out, and cuts between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or with medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cautery brings together two opposing things: namely, the burning of the joined flesh, and the stanching of blood and the drying of moisture; then the treatment of moist tents with butter or ground substance until the liquid flows out from under the burned flesh; then treat the wound with quick-setting ointments on hard charred flesh, and these are dry remedies.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes to a point from the fundament, and is removed from the body, put your finger in it and probe it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and there is thread or char between them, or it is about to pierce through, then there is no hope but by one of three methods: either cauterize as we have said, or cut down to the bone, or if you can, insert tents and treat as before; and do not go too deep that you do not cut into the lining holding the foundation, and let the discharge come out through another opening; then treat as before; perhaps it will heal. Or remove that covering and cleanse after it has been cut away from the foundation, by tent or other pointed instrument; then scald the burned flesh in the wound, as much as you can; then work to restore the wound and keep the fistula open in the area away from the foundation: then it is a lighter burden on the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes they are fistulas like this: and it is when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is on the side of the foundation from which the skin is above, take a tent pierced at the top according to this shape:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And thread a twisted thread through it, and put the tent all the way through the thread into the fistula until it reaches the tip.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is bleeding inside the margin of the foundation, then pull out the thread from that hole so that you put your finger in the foundation; and pull the end of the thread, and bring the two heads together, and strain one against the other, and leave it for a day or two; and sometimes restrain them, until the threads cut through the flesh that is between them, and separate; then cure the wound until it is healed and cleaned.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce through, then make it pierce in every way you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not appropriate to cover the wound with a bandage until it is completely healed, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spiny spatula used to make the fistula is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other, because one does not want to cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two types: either they are inside the anus, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and some discharge blood, and there may be one or more, and they are outside the anus and at the top of the anus; but those that are outside have little moisture, and sometimes there is a little green water or a little blood, and they have the color of the body; and the treatment for those who have them inside the anus is that you instruct the patient to strain to go to the toilet until the anus opens and the threads appear; then be quick, and grasp it with tweezers or hold it with your fingernail, then cut it at its roots; and if the nails cannot hold it due to moisture, they are grabbed with a piece of cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chamois; and pull them out with your fingers, then cut them, and apply some hot powder that is in place of cautery; or you can cauterize them as described in the chapter on cautery, then treat other hemorrhoids until it is healed; and if the anus cannot open, give the patient a strong and sharp enema to cleanse what is inside the anus so that it can open easily; when the patient strains and the threads come out of the anus, the treatment is easy; and you grab them with your fingernail or tweezers, cut them, then treat them as we have said until it is healed and fears incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	One must administer the stitch in the following manner: take a twisted thread and insert it into a needle; then draw the thread through to the top and push the needle through from the other side; bring both ends of the thread under the needle, and keep it slack; then tighten the thread, tie a knot, remove the needle, and do the same for all the others; leave one to stem the flow of blood; then place a damp cloth moistened with rose oil or ceratum on the wound, apply pressure, and instruct the patient to rest; then let him stay like that until he passes gas, and when it has passed, treat the wound with ointment and other remedies until it is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	from dryness of the bowels or anus
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is a drying up of fluids in the intestines, and due to a constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine avails not.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	One must cut away at the edge of a blister or hangnail with a spike, so that it does not become moist; then treat it until it is dry as it should be; and if it cannot dry, then restart the scraping more forcefully than before, until it heals well, and is scraped; then treat it until it is healed.
dou fremit	where trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Ants are a small appearance formed under the body, and they go very deep; and sometimes the frost bites them, and one feels them as if dead from trembling, and they come throughout the body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a cane of goose feather or a strong vulture feather and place this cane on the trembling so that the purple circle covers the trembling all around; then turn your hand over the whole cane so that you cup it all around the trembling, pushing it deep inside, and pull out the trembling by its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see fit to make a cane of bronze or iron according to this form, and let it be slender underneath and drawn out on top:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not pierce it, in order to hold it with the finger, and squeeze it. And if you see fit, cauterize the vein as it is before in the chapter of cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	on the form of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes an enema is made of silver or brass, or of molten bronze or steel; and sometimes one is made from these small and large instruments, according to the person to whom they are administered.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those who are administered for the treatment of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the small and large enema is above wide, or the belly is bound according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And there is an incision where the belly is bound, as you see, and the anus is inside pierced; and it has two openings on one side, and one on the other; and the belly is made of a beast's bladder or parchment, and is pierced all around with small holes, and between each hole there is one inch of space, then insert into these holes a strong thread, twisting it in an X or spiral shape all around, and gather the belly as if it were a goat; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then clysterize. And this is the shape of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	Let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head with oil or egg white or similar, then insert it gently; then the minister squeezes his two hands together, so that they are both empty, then pull out the catheter, and let the patient lie on his side, and if the medicine wants to come out, then he should hold it as long as he can; and if he sleeps for a night afterwards, it is even more helpful.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cleanse him of stomach sickness, and the medicine rushes out, then cleanse him again until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are in the anus or an abscess, then the catheter should be as fine as for a child; and it is the subtle type of catheter that is pressed against the skin.
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already discussed in the division the cure of wounds; now we will discuss the cures with the hands and with medicine, according to the situation.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and according to what makes them.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things that cause wounds are the striking of a stone, or cutting with a sword or knife, or piercing with a lance or pole or arrow, or similar objects; and they can occur anywhere on the body, like a wound on the neck, or head, or leg, or stomach, or liver, and similar organs. I will tell you how to cure each type of wound, and I will begin with simple wounds on the head, because the memory will return in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, you should take care if it is from a blow from a stone or similar object, and the skin is still torn and the wound is large, and you easily doubt a hot abscess: then make the patient bleed from the cephalic vein itself if there is little blood coming from the wound, and let the bleeding be in the opposite direction of the injured part; and prevent the patient from drinking wine and eating heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to bleed, then let his food be diminished, and do not drink wine or eat meat; and put cotton soaked in rose oil only, or in astringent wine on the wound if a hot abscess comes, and if there is no hot abscess, then put powder on the wound if all its blood is out and it has not been moved by the air; and if the fire has moved it, then put some ointments on it until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like that of a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by sutures, then bring them together by stitches, as I will describe for wounds in the belly, at the ribcage.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to the bone, and it can be touched, and it holds only by a little bit, then cut it; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as testes and cooked wheat, also as poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find pus in the skin, and it does not reach the bone, then cut away the pus all around, and let it drain out, then cure it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which does not clot, and it cannot be staunched by medicines, then tie off the artery, and if that does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is light: you must apply this powder that cauterizes so that the burn has healed.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the way of making the powder is this: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; quicklime three parts, and make the powder finely, and apply it to the wound, and hold it firmly, until it dries well and joins to all its flesh; and then bind it well, and leave it without being loosened, if it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes cautery is done with chalk alone when incense and dragon's blood are not available, but the wound is cauterized nonetheless.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the burn has moved the wound, indeed in that case, do not apply any of this powder to it; but apply some digestive ointments, or a poultice made from barley flour and water and honey, until it becomes soft; then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if a bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine forceps; and I will tell you below about fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of a wound on the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is a nerve, there is nothing else to do but to let it be, and not apply anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and makes them withdraw; and do not apply anything cold to the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member; but use warm medicines, such as warm water washes, and ointments with rose oil, and cooked washes also in warm water, and other herbs according to this method.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then cut it and bind it with bands, then heal it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and there is a hernia and swelling, then pierce it or cut lower; and if an artery is cut, and bleeding ensues, stop it, and cauterize it if necessary; and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the windpipe, and the passage for food is blocked, press down on the throat where the windpipe sits, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then compress it gently, and leave it alone for a few days, then treat it with ointments until it heals; and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then pierce it; and if there are pieces of bone, remove them all if you can, and those that you cannot reach, leave them until the wound drains and is cleaned out and the passage is unblocked; and if the wound is fresh, dust it with the powder I have described.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound, and a fistula forms, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of a spear or knife wound
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a blow from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then examine whether the wound breathes wind: thus you will know that the wound is mortal. And if the wound is not deep, but fresh with all its blood, do not put powder on it in the first hour, nor tie it up for fear of bleeding to death, but rather let the blood flow out and return to the body, and let the patient sleep over the wound for three days or more; then spasms, tremors, and pains in the limbs will not come. And when you see good signs, you will know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Heal it then with poultices and other remedies until it is healed. And if it cannot heal, but suppurates, then you will know that there is a fistula; treat it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, in front or behind, then cure it as one who is in front; if it is large, stitch it; and if it is small, use powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has chipped pieces, then remove the wound, and draw out the splinters if they are loose; and if they are not loose, let the wound fester, and thus lighten the extraction; and for other wounds in other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	There are great, medium, and small ruptures of the belly; from the large wound sometimes the intestines or nerves of the intestines protrude, causing the entrance of air; and stitching is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one, because one returns the intestines into it more with pins, when one does not return them gradually from cold to warmth; because the intestines swell as soon as they feel cold, and return more with difficulty, and therefore the smaller wound is better, because one resets the intestines to their place more easily than with other wounds. And know that there are four types of ruptures of the belly: the two common stitches occur in the stitch of the belly, and the stitch of other wounds of the body; and the two other stitches are proper to other wounds, and yet they are more proper to the stitch of the belly, and I will say one each and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and some part of the intestine has come out, and there is a need to put it back in, this can be done in two ways: either because of the size of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this way: moisten a sponge or soft cloth in lukewarm water, or cook it in squinant water with cypress and spike lavender, and rose the intestine until the swelling is relieved; and sometimes doing this warming restraint, and it is helped by the sole to reduce the swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling leaving, then moisten the intestine with water or old wine in which malva leaves have been cooked, for it is a remedy for constriction; and if it cannot enter, then make a small cut in the wound with an instrument used to treat hemorrhoids; and the first cure is better than cutting, which one must not do without great need; and the instrument for splitting is: insert it into the curve and push out, and see the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines jump out, he puts them back in according to their natural shape in their proper place, if you have the power, because this is better.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large, and it is in the lower abdomen, you should make the patient lie on his back and raise his legs above his head; and if it is in the upper abdomen, he raises his head and feet above the lower parts, and also if the rupture of the abdomen is in one of the two parts, then the injured part should be raised higher than the other. And you must manage as I say in large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, use what you have ready, then take a piece of gauze with your hand and hold it over the entire wound, and assemble the lips; and that is the common method of sewing, and it is that you pierce an needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound a space of two fingers, and insert a needle where there is a good strong thread; and pierce both sides of the skin with both sides of the subcutaneous tissue underneath, so that you make it pierce that part, and assemble the two ends of the subcutaneous tissue together with three together; then tie the thread around the needle from both sides, then assemble the two edges of the wound evenly, and then leave a space of two fingers, and insert another needle; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to how many needles you need, until the entire wound is bound; and these needles must be medium-sized, between thin and thick, because thin needles cut through all the flesh, and very thick ones cannot enter well: so they should be medium-sized; and you should not push the needles too far into the flesh and skin, so that they do not cut and open the wound before it heals; then tie the ends of the needles, so that they do not hurt the patient when sleeping, and put tents or bandages on the ends of the needles to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed. This sewing method with needles is most suitable for small wounds, because it only requires one needle or two. The second sewings is common, and it is that you assemble the two sides of the skin and the two sides of the subcutaneous tissue together at a needle where there is a strong medium thread; and when you have pierced these edges all four together, then bring the needle back to the part where you started, in the manner that one sews clothes; and leave a space between each stitch the thickness of a little finger; this sewing suits men, and I sewed up a wound on a man's abdomen, which had been cut with a knife, and was more than a palm wide, and the intestines were protruding by two palms wide, and the wound was in the middle of the abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned the intestine after it had been outside for 24 hours, and the wound was sutured for 15 days, and I treated it, and he recovered.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And they had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with ointment, because I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine; and I applied old cotton to the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he recovered.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you the two proper ways of suturing: take the needle and thread it from the outside through to the inside; when it has pierced the skin directly in, then hold the end of the thread where you threaded the needle, and pierce the other side of the wound from the inside out until it reaches the outside; and the idea of this suture is that you sew just as a leather worker sews皮leather, leaving the thread on one side and pulling it tight on the other, until the whole suture is completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of stitching, which Galen describes properly, is as follows: take two pieces and join them together naturally, then apply one end of the thread to the other, in such a way that you pierce one end only and leave the two ends of the wound; then turn the needle and pierce from the outside part inward to the inside, through the two ends of the wound; then pierce both ends from the outside part inward, through two other ends of the thread on the opposite side; this is the correct method of stitching and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen says this, and some testify to it: one should sew the belly with two needles, with thread in each; then one should push one needle from one side and the other from the other, as those who sew caries; know that when the rout is in the middle of the belly, the stitching is more painful than in other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds: and it is that when you find the fresh wound full of blood, so that the burn has moved, then put back the intestines and the lining; then put on the powder, charming charcoal, and if the burn has moved, then put on any ointment that is present, until the wound heals; then tie the thread, and sew up the lips and the miroach; then cure the wound as the others, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicine, then put on, as soon as it begins to heal, old cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	Because you do not need any other medicine in various situations where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound will affect the principal members, then you should moisten a light lamb's wool in tempered warm oil, or rose oil, and put it around the angles, and under the buttocks; and if there is pain or inflammation in the bowels, which often happens, then enema with tepid black wine, and likewise if the inflammation comes just to the intestines; and pierce inside, and know that when it's the large intestine, it's easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines, which are called 'young', cannot heal when they are raw, and it is because of the thinness of the veins that they are, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the closeness of their nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the hair jumps out of the wound, then put it back in as well as the intestines, while they are fresh; and if they are old and have become green or black, then you should tie up the area that is black so that no blood flow comes from it, for there are veins and arteries there; then cut what is between the ligature, and hang the two ends down below the wound until the extraction is eased when the hair falls out, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	of the wound where the boil was
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestines are ruptured, and the wound is small, then one can heal it in some people, for I saw that a man was pierced by a lance in the belly; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and was swollen and became a fistula, and from it came digestion and flatulence; I applied a poultice according to what I could, and did not stop subtilizing until it was healed, and the wounds closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him stitching, I doubted that the patient had pain in his belly; and he had no pain, but remained in better condition, eating and drinking; and some experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be bound in such a way: take fine thread from great testicles, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the thread has opened its mouth, put it on the two lips so that it tightens its mouth; and then tie the thread, and it will stay like that so that he cannot untie it, then put another thread after in the same way as before, until the wound is all bound up; and then cut the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the wound is in the intestine and no harm comes to the patient, and one can sew up the intestine with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal, in this way: take the tip of this intestinal thread that has been well-dissected, and then tie it to the tip of a thin linen thread, and thread the needle, and sew up the wound; and this way of sewing with thread is only as strong as the way of confidence and hope; and if the wound is large and broad, especially when it is in one of the small intestines, there is no strength or health, unless it is very thin.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it wakes up, is universally called a "fistula", especially when it is swollen and becomes bow-shaped.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is according to the green-ness of hardened and white nodules, where there is no pain, and is bowed like the feather of a bird; and sometimes it is clear and bowed, and sometimes thick; sometimes small, and sometimes large enough; and I have already spoken about this in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there is no pus, is only due to one of nine causes: namely, because of the smallness of the blood or body; or because of its malice; or because there is hard matter inside it, and on the edges, which does not allow pus to form; or because there is too much swelling; or the site is damaged, and the material is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is of a pestilential nature; or because the region's natural disposition is slow in digestion, late in healing, and prone to inflammation; or because there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, their signs, and the medical treatments in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Then I shall tell you about the treatment of a fistula which is caused by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or from the sinus, or from the intestine, or from the bladder, or from any of the sides, or from the spine of the back, or from any joint of the hands or feet; and also those that come from the primary property of the principal member, and in similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are in this way are of sad healing, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance; and if there is a fistula that does not come to the place that I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you see it recognized, then take an iron or bronze tent, if the fistula is straight, so hold it; and if the fistula is crooked, then seek it with a тон тон of lead, for the lead bends according to the tortuosity; and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot well explore it by tents, then cleanse it through one of the openings by enema, for moisture travels from one opening to another, and cleanses; then squeeze it hard in your hand, so that you may know whether there is bone or nerve, and is deep-seated and painful, and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you press your hand; and when you truly know the place where it is, and whether it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places I have told you, then treat it according to what I have said, and remove the foulness and rotten matter within; and then cure it until it is healed, and if the fistula is very deep and straight, then you must probe deeply as far as you can, then put moist tents in medicine water, and insert them into the fistula, up to its head, so that the medicine may corrode the excess which remains at the bottom; and then put healing ointments on it until it is healed, and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is damaged by the fistula, then treat it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerve bothers your limbs primarily, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then treat with things that are hot until it is healed; and if it is not healed, and becomes swollen again as before, know that you have not gone deep enough: then expose and probe until you reach the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the area; and if it is thus healed, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach it; then there is no other remedy except to let nature take its course; and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can pull it out with tweezers, then extract it with the appropriate instrument for this purpose; and if there are many bones, pull them all out, leaving none behind. And if moisture causes contrary effects, and there is no error or fear, then dry and char, and release the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then place something on the wound to draw out pus, and let it remain until the pus has run around the bone, and then the bones will come loose more easily; and if it is a large bone, such as in the leg or thigh, then clean only the rottenness until all the blackness is gone, and then heal the wound; and if there is a large part of the bone rotten, and it comes to the bone marrow, then it must be cut away and covered completely down to the rotten part, and then healed once it has been sewn up. And I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you can take example and help from my work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man of about 30 years old who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so that the matter came out through the leg, and it was swollen with a large abscess, and had no cause to drain pus; but the doctors, through their folly, worked on him until the abscesses opened up and a lot of matter flowed out, and it became a fistula, and many holes appeared through which blood and moisture from the body flowed; and many doctors treated him for two years, and there was no wise man in the art of medicine, so that I was called to see him, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated, and what was flowing out of the holes into a great body; and the skin of the young man became red, and had a citron color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent at one of these openings, and then searched all the openings, and found that one came against another from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hastened therefore, and probed one of the openings until I uncovered a portion of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption extended to the bone within; I applied what appeared to me to be medicine for the corrupted bone, and thought there was no other corruption except that which I removed; and then I began to heal the wound with strong medicines for a long time, but could not close it; so I began again, and uncovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and applied medicine to it, and then removed it, and struggled to close the wound; but I was unable, because whenever I probed around a palm's width of the bone, I had to pull it clear of its socket, and then restore it with medicines; and it healed slowly, and there was no need to repeat the procedure except for the weakness of the injury, which could not bear it, and for the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For often with the blood-letting he bled profusely, but was completely healed, and a hard lump grew in place of the bone, and he had a good disposition and no harm or contrary effect anywhere, neither when walking nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken anywhere in the body, one should treat it in this way: take a length of linen and tie it to the end of the exposed bone, and command someone to pull it upward; and put another piece of coarser linen under the first, and tie it over the lump that is above the bone, and pull on the end so that you draw out the corrupted flesh underneath, and uncover the flesh above where you see the corruption, so that the string does not cut into the flesh; and put a hot poker or a flat piece of wood underneath the bone to cover up the corrupted flesh; and one should keep pulling until one can see and feel the corruption, and do this again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If the bone is broken and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in part of it, then uncover all the flesh; then place a heated iron underneath, and then sew from one side of the corruption to the other, and apply the poultice from the edge of the corruption, as we have said. And if the corruption is at the joint, then cut into the infected joint and sew up the bone on the other side; and if the corruption is in the area between two joints, there is no need to cut further than the joint; and if the corruption is at the knuckle of the hand or foot, it is a difficult matter, but you must still investigate the corrosion and how it presents itself to you; then cleanse it in every way you can without damaging the vein or nerve; and know that there are many different tools for cutting into these bones, depending on their position, shape, size, thinness, and hardness. And therefore you should prepare a tool for each procedure as needed. Know that your work will show you the tool you need according to your knowledge of this art and the characteristics of the disease; then choose the tool you need accordingly.
dou feu	from fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The heads can become dislocated due to internal or external causes; and when you have treated this corrosion with remedies, and they do not help, then you must cover the affected limb up to the site of the corrosion, so that the patient escapes death by this or by the greater evil of the defect in the limb; and the sign is that the limb becomes black, as if burnt by fire, and after the blackness, the corrosion spreads from limb to limb, and affects the whole body; therefore, cover it quickly, and if it is due to the sting of venomous creatures, such as sea scorpions, vipers, and similar animals, and the corrosion is on the head, then cover it and do not give it any chance to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it reaches the hand, then cover it at the joint so that the corrosion does not reach the arm; and if it reaches the arm, then cover it at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is fatal, and there is no remedy other than reducing the amount of poison; and do the same when the corrosion affects the foot: if it affects the first joint, then cover it below the next joint; and if it affects the foot, then cover the whole foot; and if it rises into the leg, then cover it at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to tie off the affected limb with a ligature, and use a spatumile to separate the skin from the bone so that the bone is exposed; then cover it and place a linen cloth on each side so that the ligature does not touch the healthy tissue and cause further injury or abscesses.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	If bleeding occurs when you operate, cauterize the area gently, or apply some restraining powders; then return to your treatment until it is complete. Then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it heals. I will tell you what happened to a man in his sleep: he developed discoloration that looked like a burn, and this corrosion started at his big toe on his foot, spreading to cover his entire foot; and when the man saw the corrosion, he covered his foot, and it healed. A long time after, the corrosion reappeared on his finger, and he came to me, and I applied some counter-irritant substances after cleansing his body, but I could not stop the corrosions; and he wanted me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to, for I had no hope of removing the matter by incision. I also feared that if I amputated his hand, he would die, as his vital forces were weak. He became desperate, returned home, covered his hand, and healed. I have told you this story so that others may learn from it and know what to do if they encounter a similar case.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Sometimes an abscess occurs in a fleshy area, and remains so long that it causes a great gathering of pus; and then it bursts and drains, and the flesh jumps, and the spot remains hollow, just like a vessel; and the skin above is as thin as a piece of cloth, and does not heal up to the bone or the nerve; and such a disease is called "sain," and is not called "fistula." But if it extends so far that it reaches the bone deeply, then it is called a "fistula"; and the skin is such that you can cover the entire skin all around, and particularly when it is thin, just like cloth; and it does not heal over.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you have reason to believe that the skin is healing and the corruption is not deep, and the flesh is thick, then treat it with a clyster as follows: examine whether the breast is swollen, and the flesh which is in it has a foul odor; then clyster it with Egyptian medicine made thus: take ash, and oil, and litharge, in equal amounts, and put the medicine into a vessel over the fire, until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey; then take some of it according to your need, and dissolve it in water and honey, and clyster the breast, and squeeze the opening; let it remain there for two hours, then squeeze it out; do this many times until the breast is cleansed and the pus removed; and sometimes clysters are made with water from ashes when this medicine is not available; take vinegar from grape vines, and pour water over it, then strain it, and clyster it until you know that the breast is well cleansed; and if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash-water, then clyster with water and honey in which there is a little litharge ground; or clyster with honey and wine to which has been added honey that has healing properties and washes clean, and the wine causes the wound to dry up. And when you have done this, and you see that the breast is well cleansed, then clyster it with something that will produce flesh in it; take diaphoretic plaster, and mix it with rose oil and wine; or clyster with some medicines and ointments of which I have spoken in the section on ointments. And if the opening to the breast is small and the tube of the clyster cannot enter, then widen it with a little iron, and put in some tent of the Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment, until it is widened; and if the wound is very large, then cut away and leave only the part where the clyster can enter, and if the opening that drains the pus is above, then cover it or cover it lower down.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bowels are full, do not allow any charing; and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish, arrange things so that the bowels move to the lowest place they can, for when the bowels are full, do not allow any charing, and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish, arrange things so that the bowels move slightly downward, and leave nothing of the bowels; and take consolidative medicines to put over the wound, and let them be on the linen drape that covers the entire wound; then cover the most forceful place of the breast opening more widely than before, then apply a soothing ointment over the other drape according to the quantity of the opening, and place it over the wound opening to ease the bowels, and do not remove the large drape except after many days once; and that which is over the breast opening, remove often to remove the bowels, and know what comes from the bowels, whether venom or pus or a little or a lot, or digested or indigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in such a way and you see the nature that rises over the wound opening, then know that the breast is healing, and approach the wound; and then loosen it in the morning, or at noon, and when you loosen the wound, change the other drape, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if breast milk flows crookedly after many days, know that the breast will not heal.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons spread over a long time, do not despair of health, for health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are people who have long-term injuries to their flesh in their wounds, and those who do the opposite; and if indigested food vomits from the breast after many days, know that the breast is not cured; and if the breast is slow to heal, and is distant, then apply dry medicines that are moist in substance but dry in nature, like diafanit ointment, for it contains a large amount of vitriol, and it is the best medicine. Take diafanit ointment, and make it with rose oil, and arose from old wine, equal in substance; then cook it and use it. And the same is done with thickened honey when diafanit ointments are not available; take myrrh, aloes, and incense, grind them into powder over the honey while it is on the fire; then glue a cloth to it, and apply it to the breast, and sometimes aristologus, a long-root herb, is administered, as well as roots of the celestial lily, which is like flour made from beans and centaury. Use simple or compound remedies: grind them into powder, and apply them to the honey I mentioned, and use it. And if the cure is prolonged, and not healed by this cure, then know that the corruption is deep, and it causes impression in the bone, or in the hard limbs, or in the soft tissues; so the cure of the fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the thumb or other fingers, or it may appear on other parts of the body; and when it becomes infected and goes untreated, an abscess forms, and it grows and discharges pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and sometimes it affects the entire nail. The corrosion extends to the bone, causing a putrid pain, and the affected digit swells and turns red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have described in the previous section, and the treatment does not help, then you must cut away all the dead tissue remaining under the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cautery is a great help if the bone and nail are healthy; but if the nail becomes infected and begins to push out the dead tissue, and the wound starts to bleed, then you should place a thread under the nail to draw out the dead tissue, and then cut it away gently and carefully. Put strong medicines on the remaining tissue to remove it all, and then treat the wound with ointments until it heals.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it and draw it out, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal; and if you see the bone being corrupted, cut it at the knuckle of the finger as it is said above, then cure it until it is healed; and if it is swollen and painful, one must first heal it; then cut the fingernail of the spatulile obliquely from above, and be careful that the cutting does not reach the flesh under the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if this happens, apply something soothing.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain should be dulled in the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two toenails that grow on some people's feet by chance are all fleshy, and by chance there is bone in them, and sometimes they have nails, and some grow at the root of the toe joint, or the growth is in some knuckle of the toe.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	He who is born in the nostril of the right side does not move, and he who is born at the joint of the right side, by chance moves; the size of the one who is fleshy is light, in such a way: cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born at the root of the joint is painful to cure; keep him covered.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For he who is born in the nostril of the left side, you must first cut the flesh roundly up to the bone, then cut the bone with a convenient silk for this, then heal it until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The dislocation of two bones together occurs through birth, or the sudden impact of a wound, or the scalding of fire, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	It is necessary to cut this suture so that the nostrils repair according to their natural forms; then place between two tents or moistened cloths in rose oil so that they do not stick together; or place between two pieces of thin lead, until the slits are closed, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If the glue comes to either of his hands with the palm, then cover the glue as it should be.
des vils	of the wicked
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Veins are large vessels filled with melancholy superfluities that affect many parts of the body; and they are more common in the legs of those who walk, work, and carry loads than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore you should administer to him some purgative medicine sometimes, and then heal the wound with basil.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	There are two types of treatment for varicose veins: one is to cut them and draw out the black blood; the other is to tie off the vein and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The procedure for phlebitis is as follows: first, soak the leg in very hot water until the veins are dilated, then compress the leg from above the thigh to below the knee; next, cut the vein in one or more places with a wide incision, then draw out and drain the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood as the patient can tolerate is withdrawn; then ligate the vein and have the patient apply a poultice of gall-nut and black hellebore; when the veins fill again, repeat the evacuation and bleeding.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The treatment for this condition is as follows: raise the leg of the patient, if there is a lot of hair, then put it in a bath, and raise the leg with hot water until it turns red and the veins swell; and if you don't have a bath, heat it over a fire, and then press on the vein from the long end towards the knee, or in the part below the ankle; then open the skin at the nail, and scrape the vein from each side until it appears when touched; and you will see it red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white cord; then tie the thread under, so that it is raised from the skin, and then tie it gently at the nail, as before; then make another cut, or several if necessary, then raise and tie it at the toe, then pull and raise it to the second cut; then pull it out from cut to cut, until it comes out completely, then tie it off; and if you cannot pull and raise it, then insert a strong double thread with a needle, and tie and pull it, and tie it under the thread, and turn your hand from side to side so that it comes out; and be careful not to cut it, because if it cuts, then it cannot be pulled and raised, and it brings harm to the patient; and when you have fully treated it, then place moist wool soaked in wine and rose oil over the wound site; and dress it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vein is constricted and twisted and enveloped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron used to cover a vein is curved, and does not cut so that it covers the vein; and it should be a large curve because if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but it should be large as we have said, and this is its shape:
de la voinne civile	of a civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is winded in the legs, in hot parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in land where there is no moisture; and by chance it grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens from the pustules that come under the skin, as do snakes and worms, winding between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this wound are that there comes a great swelling in the leg, then the place changes, and the wound starts to come out, as well as the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the shoulder opens, you should wrap a piece of cloth around it, from three and a half inches to four inches, and tie it, and leave the cloth hanging on the leg, and every time that some comes out, wrap the cloth around it; and if it is too long, cut off part of it and wrap the remaining part, and do not cover it at its root as long as it all comes out. And if you cover it, it goes back into the flesh, and makes an abscess and swelling in that place, and a serious illness; because of this, it should be treated little by little until it is all gone, and nothing remains in the body. Sometimes this wound is treated when it is five or ten inches long, and once a man came to me whose was twenty inches long; and when you cover it, put in a reed or tube, and pierce it to the bottom so that everything comes out, and empty the matter inside that causes disease, then treat the place with healing medicines for a few days, and then cure it as you would an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes this vein bleeds profusely, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot, or in the foot, and a lot of pus comes out, and from which it rains; therefore treat it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that grow between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called "cow disease" in our land because it often affects cattle, and it is caused by a small worm that grows between the skin and flesh, moving throughout the body, ascending and descending, until it breaks through the skin where it goes, and emerges; and it is caused by the putrefaction of some humors, just as worms, snakes, and roundworms grow in the belly. And one fears its malice, for when it moves through the body and ascends to the head, it can enter and destroy the eye; and this often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being cured and drawn out, it cannot be helped except when it is cut: so you must therefore tie the place above and below with a strong string tightly, then cut on top of it and draw it out forcefully; and if the pus runs deep into the flesh, and you do not draw it out, cauterize it with fire on top until it comes out; and the greatest harm that it does is that it runs into the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming near to the eye, then tightly constrict under it with a forceps, then cut on top of it and draw it out forcefully; and one should use the cleansing of the body with medicated solutions for the evil humors, and with poultices of warm meats for pustules.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from flatulence
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called "vomiting" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some members, and then moves from member to member; and I saw what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling on the vein of the arm; and a little while after, I saw it rise up like a worm to the shoulder, faster than anything, as bright as silver when it moves from one place to another. The pain left that spot and settled in the shoulder, and then a little later ran throughout her body until it came to the other arm; then she said that she felt it turning around her body, just as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled much how she moved from limb to limb, for I had never before seen this illness in this way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Nevertheless, I have often seen pain move from one place to another, but not as I saw it in the woman; and I thought that it was because women have dry bodies, and their veins are uncovered, and thus appears this compelled windiness; and it does not appear according to this reason for those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels the pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then lie above and below, and then press on top until that windiness forced out of place; and cauterize the spot; and if you do not see it yourself, then treat with that which expels windiness, such as foul pills, and serapin pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they land.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of them is that there are some with large points, and small, and forked, and soldered; and some with two angles, and those with tongues, and some have parts; and they split in a member in two ways: either in a principal member they split, like brain, heart, liver, lung, spleen, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it falls into any part of these limbs and the sign of death, which I will tell you about later, appears to you: then you must be careful about removing this arrow, because death comes afterward in many dispositions; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then pull it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	The sign of the brain is when the arrow pierces the bone and passes through the skull, and there is a discharge from the brain which is on top of the skull, and there is redness and swelling all around, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of blood; and perhaps fluid flows out of the nose or ears; and he might lose his speech and voice; and there is white moisture coming out of the wound like pus, and also like a bruise on meat; and if this sign appears to you, then cease the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is not embedded in him.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The signs of jaundice when it affects the body are that it is located near the left breast, and feels as though it has been pierced with a sharp object, and is not hollow; and sometimes the jaundice makes the patient mute, and black blood comes out, and there is a feeling of coldness and cold sweat, and a fainting: then know without doubt that death approaches.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of pleurisy that affects the lungs is that without pain foam comes out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes heavily and seeks the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if an arrow pierces the sole of the foot, it is near the small bones; and it causes great pain and great distress and sighing; and all the shoulder joints move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrow pierces the stomach, by chance some undigested food might escape from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow pierces the belly, and no feces escape through the bowel, then there is little hope of a cure, nor of extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow pierces the bladder, and urine escapes and flows out, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, armpit, spine of the back, forearm, thigh, and leg, and similar limbs, are safe according to various dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or artery and is not venomous, as I will tell you so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	A certain person had an arrow that struck him in the jaw at the root of his teeth; I treated it, and pulled it out from under the flesh of his ear, and he was healed without any pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And I treated an arrow that struck him in the fat of his eye under the eyelid, and the arrow was lodged there, and only the tip could be seen pointing towards the mouth; the arrow was as large as a Turkish bowstring, with its entire shaft light-colored without ears; he was healed and no bad accidents came to him.And I treated an arrow that struck him in the fat of his eye under the eyelid, and the arrow was lodged there, and only the tip could be seen pointing towards the mouth; the arrow was as large as a Turkish bowstring, with its entire shaft light-colored without ears; he was healed and no bad accidents came to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And I drew out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic, to the ears; I soothed the pain, and extracted it with skill, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I also extracted an arrow from a man's home, which had pierced his belly, and I thought he would die; but after thirty days passed, his condition did not improve; so I cut into the arrow, and removed it, and he suffered no ill effects.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a man with an arrow in his back, and the wound has healed over it; and the arrow remains inside him, and he does not change his natural habits, nor suffers any harm in any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And I saw another man, who had an arrow in his face, and the wound was sewn up; and it remained there without causing him great pain; and many other similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And drew an arrow from the home of the prince the king, who had it lodged in his head, and it was a little declined to the right side; and the arrow was all drawn out I was called to the cure after it was drawn three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I examined it with a sharp probe, and did not feel anything; but he felt numbness and pain under his right ear.Apres qu’el fu tuit traïe, il me demanda la cure del soun mal de dent, car il sentoit une gran dolor a sa dent, et adonques convint il que je remuassies la dent del soun mal.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	After it was all drawn out, he asked me to treat his toothache because he felt great pain in his tooth; so I decided to move the tooth of its ailment.I thought it was from the tip of the arrow.I applied an astringent and digestive poultice to the area, so that the swelling would go down; and the mark of the arrow appeared to me.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the ointment several times, and the wound healed immediately, and the patient suffered for a long time, feeling the arrow in his nose; he told me so himself.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied corrosive medicine to the wound several times until it healed, and I tested it, feeling the head of the arrow which was sticking out; then I adjusted the opening of the wound with the same medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared clearly; after about four months, the wound closed up completely, but then it burst open again; so I continued to probe and manipulate it with various instruments, until one day I was able to grab hold of the arrowhead with some specially made forceps, as described later in this chapter, and I drew it out; thus I treated the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored; I restored it therefore, and the wound was sewed up, and the patient entirely recovered.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you may make your own remedy of what I do not say, for books cannot embrace everything; but wise masters compare things based on a little knowledge, and on what is present and lacking, they find new remedies and new instruments, through the descent of strange things which happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows strike the limbs where they are pierced in two ways: either through the place where they enter or through another part; and those which go out through where they entered are called intranasal arrows, and sometimes they come out now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not come out now, let it be until the carcass is putrefied all around, and let the outlet be relieved; and likewise, if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, let it be for some days, and move it every day; and then it will come out, and if it does not, pierce all around with a very thin stick until the opening around is enlarged, and then pull it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and goes just to one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have mentioned appear in the patient: do not pull it out, but let it be until it is even after a few days, for if the arrow reaches the cortex, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not stuck in the bone only, and does not reach the cortex, and the patient remains for several days without a bad accident, then treat it with the method of pulling it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is stuck very tightly and cannot come out, then administer cuts around it, as I have told you; then cure the area until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is lodged in the body so that it cannot be seen, then seek it throughout the entire body; and if you feel it, then draw it out with a suitable instrument; and if you cannot due to the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein in the way, then cut open the wound so that it is large enough for you to pull out the arrow; and if there are barbs on the arrowhead that are preventing its removal, then remove the flesh that is caught on them from both sides as much as you can, and then bend or fold back the barbs so that you can extract the arrow; be careful not to break the arrow shaft as you pull it out.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot at once, then let it lie until around the nail is soft, then pull it, for the extraction is eased.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the flow of blood is contrary to what you expect, then refer to what we have said about treating an arrow wound in its chapter; and be careful to avoid cutting into any nerves or veins, and use every means possible to draw out the arrow safely, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently, according to the patient's condition; and reset the dislocated joint according to how it was before the arrow struck, for that is the greatest help you can give, and if you cannot do so, then set it as the signs indicate.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Arrows that come from elsewhere, or where something protrudes from them, or the skin is swollen in that area, whether one sees or feels it clearly: cut above it, as high as the pincers can reach, and then pull it out; if it flies out at once, so much the better.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	If it is stuck in the bone, then rotate your hand around, as deep as it can go into the bone, and widen the wound, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, leave it for now and try pulling again until it comes out; and if the arrow is inside, push it all the way in; and if the arrow is short, and you see fit to administer pressure, then press the instrument into the arrowhead so that the point of the arrow goes into the instrument; then pull it out, and if the arrow is stuck, push the instrument in with its point entering inside to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is pierced, you should cut around the flesh where the venom is, as much as you can, then treat the wound as it should be.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow is in the thigh or buttock or belly or bladder or ribs, and it is close by, and you can reach it; and you must be careful not to touch the vein and nerve, and then pull it out, and then close the wound, if necessary; and treat it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tongs used to treat arrows is similar to the beak of a bird, and here is the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many types: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the feathered end is like the feathers of a bird, to push against the point of the arrow, as it is shaped:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of tongs for pushing and gripping is thus:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are XXXI veins from which one can be bled, and in the head there are XVI of these, namely: two veins located behind the ears, called 'herbech'; and two arteries in the temples that are visible; and two veins that are in the corners of the eyes, called 'aspires'; and one vein that is in the middle of the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two windpipes that are in the neck; and two veins that are above the lips, these are the veins called 'augeherich'; and two veins that are below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins from which one commonly bleeds are five in each arm: one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the rib cage, and the common people call it 'vein of the head'; and the middle one is called 'fast', and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and the common people call it 'vein of the heart'; and the basilic is on the right side of the rib cage, and the common people call it 'vein of the belly', and it is above the pudenda, and it is that one from which they bleed, which clearly opens above the groin.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the salvator is the vein between the auricular and annular, and it has two branches; and in the leg and the foot there are three veins: one is under the curve of the groin on the left side of the rib cage, and the second is below the ankle on the right side; and the vein called 'thigh', which is at the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The bleeding of the veins that are after the ears aids ancient cataracts and emigration; and the qualities of the bloodletting, as I told you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then wring the patient's neck with a rope, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending on the head: press them then with your finger, and where you feel the pulse under your finger, sign it; then take the lance, and pierce it under the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand over the entire vein upstream, and pierce both skin and vein thoroughly for a distance of two fingers, and let the blood come out until you see it; then stop it and ligature it, so that it is healed; and I have already said about the incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The bleeding of the two arteries in the temples is good for old migraines, and for sore eyes and habitual ophthalmia, and for agues affecting the eye sockets; and the qualities of the bloodletting are as I have said: and it is that the patient strains his neck so that the two veins are clearly visible; and he feels the pulse under his finger, and then he signs with his finger; then he lifts the vein at the top of his finger, and inserts the lance underneath, and lifts the vein at the top, and cups it, as you have done in the other veins, and lets the blood flow according to your need; then release the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton; and then tie it firmly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of their binding and their release at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The bleeding of the vein in the forehead is as beneficial as the bleeding of the cephalic vein for diseases of the face that are old and have migrated, and have become red; and its qualities are such that the patient turns his neck until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fosseur", whose form is as follows:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point over the vein, and press with your hand, or something else, and let the blood issue according to the amount you see; then loosen the neck of the patient, and tie the vein until it is healthy, and sometimes the work is done with a large flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Nevertheless, the flames should not be too sharp; and it heals crookedly, because the bone is close by, and perhaps breaks the flame when it is delicate.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The bleeding of the two veins that are in the temples helps with eye diseases, and redness, and red eyes, and diseases of the face; and the qualities of their bleeding are such that the patient turns his neck by twisting one or both ears, as before; then he bleeds, and the bleeding should be through the vein, a little from the long flame, a little wide, because there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, perhaps it will break; then blood will flow, as much as you need, and then tie it with a thread, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The bleeding of the vein by the nose is good for ague, and for sudden fever, and for diseases of the face, such as swelling and redness that comes in the face, and especially when it is old; and the quality of the bleeding is that the patient should pinch his nose, then squeeze his nostrils with his left hand, and take a long, thin flame, and insert it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well otherwise, and the blood will begin to flow now; do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then tie it off for one night, for it is quickly restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The bleeding of the two sinuses also helps with strangulation of the windpipe, and the beginning of hoarseness, and many diseases, and empyema, and corroding sores, and herpes, and stomach ulcers; and the quality of the bleeding is that the patient should pinch his nose as we have said; and let the healer stand above the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a chair, then bleed the vein on the side a little widely, then draw the blood gently, or as much as is needed; then do the same on the other side, then untie the ligature, and gently squeeze both veins so that the patient does not choke; and let it be until the morning, so that the wound heals.
de la sainie des leivres	of bleeding from the lips
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The healing of veins on the lips helps with sores in the mouth, and gum decay, and splitting of the lips, and toothache and gum pain.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the bleeding is to make the patient sit facing you, and hold his head as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, and they are recognized by being dark in color, and because there are fine dark veins around them: grab both of them, and if you do not recognize them, and you doubt which they are, then grab the largest of each side, and likewise do this with the two veins above and below, for it is the same procedure.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of bleeding under the tongue:
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The bleeding of veins that are beneath the tongue is aided after the bleeding of the cephalic vein, and it is done by constricting the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the bleeder is such that the patient should sit between your hands in front of the sun, and you should lift up his tongue and look beneath on each side for a black vein: therefore, bleed both sides, and do not go too deep, because underneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the neck from which one commonly bleeds are bled in two ways: either with a large, pointed, mirting-flame, or with a subtle olive-colored needle, as you would with an eye, and they are called "anesil"; and they are large or subtle according to the size and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame of myrrh is highly renowned, and it is broad as you can see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the veins that are smooth and filled with thick blood, and which contain thick and troubled blood; and this is the form of the olive flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	is more pointed and is for bleeding the veins, where there is thin yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The basilic vein, which is one of these veins, aids diseases that are beneath the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly; and it is fitting for the surgeon to bleed profusely, and to compress the artery underneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he compresses the artery, and bleeding comes, then it must be staunched, as I have said; and the flame should not be piercing, but cutting like a chisel.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilic does not open plainly, then you must stretch it and change to another; or you can take some from it, or you can bleed in its place in the arm: it opens plainly; and stop the flame with a chisel, as we have said.Et si la voinne que sainnes ne s’esgoutte pas par li flaime anesil, si covient que tu l’esgoutes par auter fleche, ou par altra maniere, si com nos avons dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mas taillans si com anesil.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you want to know the location of the bleeding, you must stretch out the arm so that you can feel the pulse; then sign the spot with your fingernail, and then tie the arm, and cover the vein with a flame until it is numbed; and be careful not to pierce the artery when you see the spot puff up, for that is the artery: therefore avoid it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it bubbling up like a child's urine, and the blood is red and thin, know that this is the artery: therefore hurry, and place your finger over it for a long time, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops; tie the arm, and leave it alone, and do not move the patient; and let him be fearful, and do not move him until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the bleeding is not stopped and he faints, and medicine is not at hand, then press on the artery until it stops, for that is where the blood flows from; and stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a sliver of wood from a tree branch, split it in two and take one half and bind it well until the next day; if there is no bleeding then that is good; but if not then stop the bleeding as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding; the stopping of bleeding is not difficult for various wounds in this small area, nor for the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The wound in the middle if it is bleeding from above the head and below the body, because it is made of basil and cedar as we have said; and the bandage should be applied to the nerve below, and if it is too deep, and the nerve is found and inflammation and the wound is infected, and it may not heal; and this nerve often opens up in some people due to its subtlety, and if it does not open for anyone then you should treat it with an anesthetic instrument.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, they should cut it lengthwise.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The bleeding of the head if it helps, that it draws blood from the brain, and helps the eyes; and one should bleed using a flame olive or myrtle, for it is the safest of all veins, for there are no nerves or arteries beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, one should seek the lightest spot, and if one misses the first time, try again; and perhaps the spots will swell in some men, if they miss the first time, but it causes no harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of healing depends on your thoughts.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you should know about bleeding is that it is done only to maintain health and prevent diseases; and the bleeding should be done in one of the three veins: the head, the arm, or the leg; and one should bleed at the beginning of Lent, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of digestion are apparent; and one should bleed on the first or third day, after two or three hours of the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The bleeding that is administered for illnesses does not have a set time, but when there is need, day or night, at all hours and all times; and one should not bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor women who are pregnant beyond the fourth month until the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	No one should bleed those who are older than sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone wants to bleed, in any way, they should first clear the intestines with a gentle enema if they have much retained feces so that the veins do not draw harmful surplus fluids from the intestines into the principal limbs; one should not bleed those who are bloated from food, nor those who are intoxicated, as long as it has been, nor the sickly; and if one bleeds after a colic attack, vomiting, and diarrhea, and excessive sexual intercourse with a woman, and exertion, waking and fasting, and that which comes from all bodily fluids, or by weapon or from the body; then gently withdraw the humors, if the blood is thick, through food and drink and medicine, if you have the power to do so; then enter the bath, if nothing else will cleanse the blood, to gently cleanse the blood, and one should bleed near the navel around the third hour, as we have said; and one should abstain that day from exertion, and from pinching and luxury, and similar things; and be calm and cheerful, and the bleeder should be higher than the person being bled, and he should rub the arm two or three times, then tighten the ligature gently above the vein, for if it is too tight or too loose, it will not draw the blood; then he should rub the site with his hand until the veins swell, and one feels them; then he should moisten the blade of the bleed with a little old oil, then press his left index finger on that vein below the bleeding site, where he wants to bleed, so that the vein does not break away from the blade.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	Because there are veins that flow like cords to the wound, and some that are full of windiness, so that when one applies a flame, it retreats from the flame and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of those; and if one opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, so it is necessary for the surgeon to be skilled in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens the first time, it is good; but if not, open it again a little lower down or up above, depending on which way the vein is going, if the skin is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the wound is swollen and the patient is afraid, let him go for a day or two without binding his arm; perhaps hot abscesses will form; do not enter the bath, then restart the bleeding if she wishes; and if the hole is small, pierce it with a thin needle and you fear that not as much blood flows as you wish, then apply the flame directly to that very hole; and work gently, so that the wound is swollen; because this happens many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the vein swollen, do not re-bandage it, and put a little liniment of oil on it, for it lightens the body of blood, and in this place the liniment of oil is effective; and likewise apply the liniment of oil to every vein that you open, to stop the flow of blood; and it also acts as a poultice and bandage when applied to the site. It subsides gently when it is too swollen.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there is a large abscess that occurs often, especially when the opening of the vein is small, be quick and apply to the site a sponge moistened with warm water, and hold it for an hour; and you should do this after the flow of blood from the vein has ceased, and if a darkness or greenness remains in the area for some days, it will not harm him; and if you see anything, apply something made from aloe or myrrh dissolved in wine or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times abscesses and appearances arise from the bleeding of the basilic vein; therefore place your hand upon it, and if you find the place soft to the touch, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid putting anything we have mentioned on it, however, for it might come from an artery; instead, make a dry poultice to harden the area, then treat the wound with another treatment until it heals.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to its nature and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	Because if the pus is black, let it flow out until it turns red; and if you see it is thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for one who is full and swollen, and needs bloodletting, to make the wound larger, and the cuts wide; and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and let them be bled a little and often, and they should be bled by cutting diagonally, not by pricking; and this method of bleeding prevents the flow of blood and the damage to nerves, and is better than bleeding from a long or wide cut.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for one whose body needs bleeding, it is fitting to give them moist bread in pomegranate juice; if they are feverish, let them eat moist bread three or four times before the bleeding. And if their complexion is cold, let them eat moist bread with syrup of myrrh, or with aromatic honey syrup seasoned with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cardamom, and perfumed syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	If he faints during bleeding, after a great deal of blood has been let, then he should inhale the vapor of a hot drink, and use aromatic syrups, and employ other remedies that we have mentioned in the chapter on syncope, to open the veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to open his arm and bleed again, when it is weakened by heavy bleeding, he should bleed slowly according to the amount of his strength continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wants to open his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong pulse, let him bleed seven hours after the first bleeding or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to bleed elsewhere, let him bleed on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is a great deal of blood inside the body that has been heated and causes fever; so one must draw off a large quantity, and dilate the opening until it bleeds freely; then you should attend to all the details of bleeding, and put your hand over his pulse while he bleeds, so that death does not come in the place of fainting, and this happens many times when the person bleeding is negligent; nor, when you see the arm loosening and bleeding a second time, and the opening closed, should you press down hard upon it; nor if it is crooked, should he stretch out his arm violently, for that would be bad; but let him keep it still while he bleeds a second time; or else put the tip of the cautery to the opening, so that the blood which is congealed at the opening of the vein may issue forth, and put some salt dissolved in water on it, and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, leave it and do not bind it, until the abscess is relieved.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, then let him bleed in the same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	Veins in the arm are healthy at the site of the vein in the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of the bleeding is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the vein turns red; then let it be bound gently so that the vein appears well, then bleed it from the middle, not from the broad or long part; and let the opening be wide, and let the bleeding be done near the joint of the hand, and if no blood comes out, put the hand back in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough; and if it is in winter, do not put the hand back in hot water, for it will be put in hotter water than in summer; and bleeding from this vein is safer than all other veins, for there are no arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The bleeding of the savable vein of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the method: stretch out the hand and put it in hot water until the vein swells; then bleed it from the side, and if you close it completely at both ends, it will do no harm; and do not go too deep, for the nerves are naked underneath the flesh. Then put the hand back in hot water if the blood is frozen in the wound and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have bled as much as is necessary, then put oil and silk on the vein to close it up, and do the same for each vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The surgery of the left hand is similar to that of the right hand, and you should do everything as I told you about the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The remedy of the sop is good for all diseases that are under the body, such as diseases of the stomach, and retention of fluids, and diseases of the intestines, and the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of its remedy are such that the patient should put his foot in hot water, and rub on the vein until it bursts, and apply it to the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, and up the foot there goes a great deal of rain; heal it therefore at the widest vein, or at the ankle, whichever is better.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal it on the foot, then guard against the nerves that are underneath, and heal it across as well as up and down; and let the flames be anointed.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water, and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the remedy does not work the first time, try it a second time higher up, for the place is salty; do not be afraid of nerves, as we have said, and likewise make the remedy on the other foot in the same way.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The location of the sciatic vein is at the ankle, and its treatment helps with hip pain when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its healing is that the patient enters the bath, and twists above the ankle three times, for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then heal it in every way you can, and by crossing over; and it is better that you cover it, for the place is safe, and it is very relaxed in many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not believe this, then heal a vein on his back that opens near the little toe, and move towards the small toe, and beware of the nerves; and make the blood flow until you see it, and then untie the ligature, and place cotton over it and bind it; now it is healed.
des sainies de ventouse	Of cupping.
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Leeches are made of horns, or brass, or glass; and bleeding is done in two ways: either by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping, which is done without fire, is done in two ways: sometimes with all fire, sometimes without; and the cupping that is done by heat and by bloodletting is performed in 14 places on the body, one of which is at the top of the head; another in the neck; two others on both sides of the neck; one under the chin; one on each shoulder; one above the hips; one on each arm; one on each leg; and one on each ankle. And cupping does not draw blood, except from small veins that are dispersed throughout the flesh, and because of this it weakens nothing at all, as is done with vein-opening; and it should not be administered, neither with fire nor without, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if for the necessity of illnesses one must vomit, or due to habits, we should induce vomiting every hour at the beginning or end of the month, and in between and at all times; for there are those who, when they need to vomit, have a heavy head; and there are those who experience fullness and redness in their face, and in their head and neck, and darkness in their eyes; and there are those who experience a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and taste blood; and there are those who dream, and see by night blood and wounds and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially if it is in the middle of the month, we command him to be bled after three hours of day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The mucus of the nose helps with headaches ... that come to the eyes, and it must not be after the evacuation of the whole body; and this ventilation is in the place of the cerebral mucus, and it must not be used by those who are of a cold complexion, or who have catarrh, because it does them great harm; and for this reason the elderly should not use it, nor those who have cold diseases in their head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often heal themselves become oblivous, and because of this, the leech must place the cupping jar a little lower down to avoid oblivousness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventosation in the neck is located at the junction of the head and the basilic vein, and because of this, it helps with discomfort in the feet, and with fissures in the channels of the lungs, and with constipation and bloating; and one must not push on it too much, for if it is pressed too firmly, it can cause harm to the intestines, stomach, and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventosations at the two sides of the neck help with headaches, and eye pain and inflammation, and with strangulation, and with toothache, and are located at the junction of the basilic vein; and you must instruct the surgeon to express his hand while placing it, so that he does not compress the artery and cause a bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	Ventilation below the chin is good for mouth diseases, and for gum corruption, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is located in the area of the veins of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The windings of the shoulders are effective for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The ventosations in the armpits are like three veins in the arm, for they attract blood from these large veins; and command the surgeon not to press too deeply, for the area is naked of flesh, and beneath it lie nerves and arteries.Li ventosation dou costel dou coté droit est en leu de la sainie de la veine dou col, et si vaut a dolors des coutes et des coutes, et as dolors des membres sus le costel; et covient qu’il ne fie mie trop em parfond, car li leus est nus.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping glass which is placed on the buttocks is good for hemorrhoids and diseases below, and it must be a large one made of copper, which needs to be carefully handled; otherwise, if it were thin, it would break and cause great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	Cupping glasses on the legs heal quickly, as they attract blood from throughout the body and are beneficial for old pains in the joints, the hips, and the bladder, and bring relief to flowers; they are placed at the inside of the thighs and ankles, and even though they weaken the body after prolonged use, they bring relief in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of placing the cupping glass is to first put it on empty, then suck gently, place it firmly, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the area turn red and swollen, and the redness of the blood appears; then pause, remove the cupping glasses, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are those with thin skin and large pores: therefore, one should suck only once, and make wide and somewhat deep wounds, and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to suck twice: the first time to make the path for the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the vein is very thick, it must be pricked a third time; and when we want to draw a little blood, we only prick once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want a lot of blood, we suck often; and if the blood is thick, we pierce it with a needle, and the end is that the veins are pierced suddenly, and it is convenient for those who have thick and hard skin, and who have narrow pores, that you anoint the places of the cupping glasses with an astringent and dissolving oil: if it is in the summer, with violet oil, or with sweet almond oil, or with squash seed oil; and if it is in the winter, with watercress oil, or lily, or chamomile, or similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the swelling is large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsamite, or oil of aniseed, and similar oils.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if those whom we heal have soft flesh and wide pores, no oil should be put on them, but they should be washed after cupping with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or squash water, or porcelain water, or similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have a lot of moisture, if they rise from bed, or water of myrrh, and of sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large sores heal them with old wine, or with water of vinegar, or with a decoction of anise or camomile, or other similar things; and one should not bleed with a cupping glass before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and they should not sleep after being bled, but they should keep watch, when they are to be bled and when they have been bled.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And beware if the person being bled is choleric, and if their blood is too sharp and inflamed; they should eat cool things such as pomegranates and endives and lettuce with garlic, and similar foods; and they should not eat pungent foods, or meat that is lean, nor any moist foods.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those of cold complexion should drink syrup of honey, and moderate old and new sweet wine, and eat light food, and eat pungent foods and pigeons and small birds; and the day they are bled, they should drink more than eat; and it is good to give some men triacle or musk before bleeding, or afterwards, to strengthen the main organs; and the blood should be mild, but those of hot temperament should not drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The cupping glasses that are applied without breaking the skin are those that are applied to the liver, and to the mumps, and to the gout, and to the belly, and the groin, and the flanks, because these members do not bear being hurt on their own, and it is only done to draw blood from one member to another, as we do when we put them on the breasts when the nipples are healthy; to remove the viscosity that is in a member, as we do when we put cupping glasses on the belly and on the groin to reduce a swollen member; and it removes pain when there is gangrene or stone, and by its attractive power it may draw out the gangrene, or dislodge the stone from its place; and thus it acts when one applies it to the liver and to the mumps when there is retained flatulence, and these cupping glasses are administered empty merely to suck; and sometimes they are applied with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water, as in diseases of the pleurisy, and in this way one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or with water in which suitable herbs have been cooked.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the cupping glass administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it is two digits wide and half a palm deep, and on the side around the middle there is a small hole, like that for an awl, and it should be of brass, smooth in front so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb; and in the middle there is a crossbar of brass or iron, to place a candle, and they are both large and small according to the illnesses and the age of those who take them; for the ventouses of children are different from those of the old, and of the thin from the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one should thus place this ventouse on the limb: take the candle of wax or the linen, and place it within the ventouse at the crossbar in the middle, so that the flame is at the bottom of the ventouse and does not burn the patient; then place it on the limb, and hold your fingers over the hole we mentioned, so that when one wishes, the vapor will go out, and one removes the ventouse. Then take the linen as before, and repeat often if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the cupping glass therefore which is administered for sickness of pleurisy, has no rod nor hole, and is not removed until when it is full of water, and is placed on the limb only by itself; and that is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Leeches are not removed until in members where one cannot place cupping glasses due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in naked flesh, such as fingers or toes, and others; and the quality of using them is that when you find leeches which are in sweet waters without burrowing, take them; and put them into sweet water, until they become familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; and then let it be bled from a vein and cupped, then rub the member until it turns red, and place the leeches upon it; and when they are full and crawl away, if it is a place where one can place a cupping glass, then put one on, for that is much better.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, then lift the area with ash, and then with water, very well, and then squeeze it; and if the veins are too tight after the body of the leeches, moisten a linen cloth in cold water and place it on top until the leeches are engorged; and if the veins are multiplied, then place crushed vitriol, or gales, and similar things on top, until they are stopped; or you place half a handful of peeled peas on the area and leave them until they turn black at the site, and it will now stop; and if you need more, then take other leeches.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the leeches will not attach, then rub the area with fresh blood, or you pierce it with a needle until the vein flows, and then place the leeches on top; and as soon as they smell the blood, they will attach themselves; and when you see that they are defecating, then powder over some crushed aloe, or ash, and they will now cling.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is for the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that the foolish people who delve into this chapter have never seen any of the ancient books or read any letters; and for this reason, knowledge is stranger in our land, for I have never found anyone good at it; and I know nothing about it, except through the knowledge of the ancient books, in which I have studied so much that I have acquired the science, and through experimentation and the habit of my life. And I have described to you in this chapter what is contained in it, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are brought in, just as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we should say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the matters and the chapters, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when any bruising or dislocation or twisting or fracture occurs in someone, you must hurry to heal the patient from one side and the other, if nothing else prevents it, such as weakness of the body, or youth, or old age; and if the weather is not very hot or too cold; and eat cool foods, that is, cold meats, and deer and hare meat, and do not drink any wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and do not fill themselves with food that fills the veins with blood, until you have reason to suspect a hot abscess or swelling of matter in the limb; then let the patient return to their first treatment.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, then one should nourish the patient with foods that promote swelling or粘稠度(viscosity), such as cooked wheat in water, rice, testes, feet, pig's stomach, ox's maw, fresh fish, and full-bodied wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For the body swells more quickly with moisture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well set or joined according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, as in the bones of small children; but have no concern, reset the broken bone with the large tendons that stretch and join the limb together, as it was before; and do not stop at all in his work, and for this he should eat plenty of meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And you know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from that of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all types of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	Because there is a break that goes to the root, and another in sharpening, like the tip of a feather for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with a wound, and a break throughout a small split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each way has its own technique and proper instrument for restoration, according to what the memory comes back in its place; and the fracture of the bone is known by the fact that the limb is twisted, and it appears well through deformation, and it sounds when pressed with the hand; and when there is no twisting or pain in the touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture; but it can still have twisting, or splintering, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You should not move it with your hand, but put on the medicines that come below, and then hold it firmly and gently.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And you should know that the fracture which goes into the bone, and where the two parts are separated, they must now be put back together evenly, so that the abscesses heal; and if hot abscesses appear, then let it be for a day, until the abscesses are calm; then put it back to the way it was, as easily and gently as you can, and know that the restoration of this is easier than the restoration of one where there are pieces missing; then bind it, as is appropriate afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if it is in two parts, whether it is a hand or foot, or your hand if it is a small member, or by two tendons, or by one tendon and your hand; and put the member according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the member are separated, then bring them together by all means in their places as you can, and be careful that by your work there does not come injury or pain to the patient; and join well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel it with your hand whether it seems well or not; then adjust it nicely, and do not strain it too much or press it as those who cause hot abscesses and contractions in the limb through their work, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is ready, then carefully treat the patient so that he does not move it, whether waking or sleeping, turning or otherwise; and be sure that the limb is so secure that he feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, then it is not yet healed, and you should put him in such a position that he feels no pain; and be careful that it is set straight, so that no crookedness comes to it when it is healed; and the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	You know that broken bones are diverse in size, length, and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small limbs, such as arms and fingers and the like: these should be wrapped with soft, fine linen; and for larger ones, such as thigh and leg: use a wide, strong bandage, for the wide bandages embrace the whole large limb and constrict it evenly all around, so that no swelling remains; then wrap light sponges all around, three or four times according to the size of the limb, and tighten your hand a little at every turn of the bandage, then go over the broken part and tighten less, so that the break is moved away a little; and soften the bandage little by little, until you grasp most of the healthy part, then take another bandage and wind it straight around the broken part again; then go back to the part underneath the break, and tighten gently, neither too tight nor too loose, as we have said above in the first hour; then put between the bandages sponges of linen or cloth, until they are all even, then bind all over with a bandage, and then put on your splints well-made, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place something soothing and hot upon the abscess, and which removes the swelling, and leave it thus for a few days; then press gently with your fingers, and they should be made of half a rod of willow, or of wood used for making knives, or of palm branches, and they should be in this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	but the finger that is placed on the fracture should be a little thicker and wider than the others; it should also be as long as the limb requires in terms of smallness or size; then press gently with your fingers just as you did at first, then tie a thread over them properly, just as in the case of the first fracture; the tighter it is, the better; and the thread must be thin, neither too thick nor too thin, and it should be made of soft flax; for if the threads are thick, as I have seen foolish people do when they make their knots with twisted cords, and this is a great error, for the knot cannot be even if it is too fine, and there should be no less than two fingers between each finger.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is sore under the eyes after the dislocation in their healthy state, then place beneath them linseed poultices or soft lambswool so that it does not break.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the fracture and the vein is broken, I will describe its treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And you shall know that it is not right to pull out all the broken members on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the member is large, it should not be bandaged for more than five or seven days, or longer according to the security of the hot abscess; and here is the manner of the ancient plaster for healing fractures, dislocations, and twisting: take flour from the walls of the mill, and cook it with an abundance of egg, and apply this preparation, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it. This is the common way to heal fractures in various situations, especially in women and small children, because it is not too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way of plaster that restores broken bones and dislocation and torsion: take 3 grams of absinthe, and ladani, and enule, and asafoetida, and gum arabic, and mastic, each 10 grams; myrrh and aloes, each 5 grams; alechimic 8 grams. Make these into a powder and mix them with plenty of eggs; if the person's complexion is hot, use this plaster, because it is of good composition and restores broken bones quickly, and it is useful for many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way of plaster that is good for twisting: take mugwort and mallow, each 10 grams; myrrh and aloes, each 8 grams; acacia 6 grams; Armenian bole 10 grams, and grind well, and cook with water or an abundance of egg, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method of plaster for joints and bones that have been dislodged from their places, and to ease the resulting pain, and for fractures: take new lamb's wool, and soak it in lard and cooked oil, and apply it to the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not restore, but it is good for soothing a hot abscess and alleviating pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of plaster that heals broken bones: take dry fig leaves and earthworm leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster from them.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of plaster to help heal a fracture and reduce swelling from an abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take the root of marshmallow, camomile, violet flowers, and wheat flour, one part each; and grind them, and cook with wine. If the affected member is swollen, cook it with moist coriander water or water, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another, stronger method of plaster for when a tough abscess occurs during healing.Take the root of marshmallow, camomile, and violet flowers, one part each; and grind them, and cook with wine. If the affected member is swollen, cook it with moist coriander water or water, and apply it.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take the roots of viscum album, and flax seed, buckthorn, camomile, and marigold, and violets, of each one part; and grind them, and cook with salt water, or fresh water, or wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hypocrites says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken member to restore it except for cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says that it should be between two things, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen says that one should put on a broken member, to restore it, dry things slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of plaster that is good for injury and pain: take mugwort and lamb's tail, or owl feathers, and viscumsalve, and salt equally, and bruise them, and make plaster and lie in it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then loosen it a little after, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor move the bone from its place; if not, loosen it by hand for several days. And if pain comes to the area, or itching, without rest or swelling, then hasten and loosen it, and remove the plaster immediately; and take light cloth, and sponge of the sea moistened in water, and apply to the area until the itching ceases and the pain is soothed; then let the member rest for an hour, then apply a poultice of linseed oil and vinegar, and bind it with a nut, until you are sure of a hot abscess; and let the inflammation of the member subside, and the pain be removed, then begin gently again, and a little plaster, and do not pull it as hard as before; and gently until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, take it all out, and you need to apply a poultice and a bandage, and do this again as you did before.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	If the limb does not receive anything of what we have said, do not dislocate it until three, four, five or seven days have passed; and sometimes let it be for twenty days, according to what one sees, as long as the fracture remains, and the adjustment of the flesh above approaches; then restrain it more than before, and increase its meat, as I have said before; and if you see the place drier than necessary, know that nourishment cannot come; therefore moisten it with warm water, every time you dislocate it, and this should be every third day, and loosen a little the bandage; through this work, nourishment reaches the limb, and quickly heals what the foolish healers do, who restore the limb crookedly: this is bad, and such work is cowardly, and I see nothing in it but weariness and doing it properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of the various methods of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many types of fractures, with different shapes and distinct causes. Some fractures are caused by the impact of a sword, breaking the bone all the way to the syrinx, which is under the bone, as with an axe or a club. This type of fracture is called "axe fracture".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword strikes the bone from above without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound of these two fractures can be large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a closed fracture, or a split, or from the impact of stone, or from falling on stone, or other similar injuries.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating fracture, which approaches the membrane below the bone, or it is on top of the bone, and this wound can be large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is in the bone as thin as a hair, and the split is small, then this type of fracture is called "capillary". And if the wound is made by stone or by falling, or by something similar, and drives the piece of bone inward, and the spot is chapped like the way blacksmiths work on kettles; then the stone goes inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	This happens more often in those with moist bones at the top, like the head of a child; and it happens with all types of fractures where small pieces are dispersed like pebbles; I will speak about them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all the ways of breaking by examination, and by corruption of the flesh that is above it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair-like appearance is discovered when one uncovers the bone and rubs it, then the black crack becomes visible.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fractures, be aware of accidental illnesses, and if you see any harmful events such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, extension, palpitations, fever, eyes popping out and turning red, and other similar symptoms in various conditions, then it cannot heal without a doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a surprising accident and you hope for healing, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the newborn comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in this state, then you must hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the membrane under the bone is not corrupted, and the accidents we have described do not occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone comes to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the broken part thus: and it is necessary that you grasp the head of the injured person, and expose the bone in every way that you can, and the shape of the wound more gently than you can, and if bleeding occurs on exposing the bone, or a hot abscess, use aid as appropriate, and you must fill the site with wet rags soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the hot abscesses are calmed, and be sure there is no more bleeding; then begin around the bone to remove it, and this is done according to two methods of treatment: one method is that you cut narrowly in front, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then he puts in another stitch larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you should have various different stitches, some narrow and some wide, and they should be pointed and made of iron; and work quickly so that you do not pierce the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is thick and hard, then you should pierce it all around, so that you can use stitches with awls, not going deeper than the bone of the skull; and it must have a rim or circle on top so that the point does not go beyond the bone. You should have several of these so that each one goes into the thickness of the bone, and you will need awls for all parts of the skull. There are three types of awls:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing around the broken bone is to place an awl on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you feel that the bone is pierced; then move the awl to another place a little later, and continue all around. Then use the chisels to chip away at the space between the fragments of bone, doing this as skillfully and gently as you can, as we have said, so that you draw out the bone with your hand or with one of the tools you are using, like tweezers or pincers; be careful not to touch the brain or the sinuses.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and cut the bone, it is appropriate to resect the membrane that clings to the bone with any other similar instrument to an incisive forceps, but it should be more slender and more delicate than other forceps; and if anything remains of the small bones or scales, remove them lightly with the instrument; then cure the wound with tenting and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another way of doing it which is safer, according to Galen, who praised it highly, is as follows:
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	First, you must expose a part of the bone where the broken bone is visible, so that when you have exposed that part, you will place under the head of this incisor, a lenticular shape, which is its form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, and the part is sore on both sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small mallet above, so that you lightly strike the bone all around, and be very careful of the membrane that is underneath; if it is adherent to the bone, then loosen it lightly, for one can loosen it well without harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is cut only slightly on top, and there are small pieces, then one must smooth that roughness, and remove the shards with a very thin rasp, of which you should have various sizes, in order to apply the most suitable one according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Take first a large rasp, and then a finer one, and do not cease doing this until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other haircuts and subtle breaks, you must minister according to its nature; and this is not answered by one who has devoted his study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the wound is exposed, you should take a linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it over the wound; then take another cloth doubled in two or three layers, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth; and do this as gently as you can so that you do not burden the sinus, then administer another bandage above, and do not tighten it more than is necessary to hold the wound; leave it thus for one or two days, until the abscesses are soothed, then loosen it, and apply medicine such as roots of lilies, and flour of beans, and incense powder, and aristologus, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and place it over the wound, and administer medicine without biting; and be careful that the wound is clean, so that you do not leave any ointment on it, nor allow any pus to collect, for when pus collects on the membrane of the brain, it hardens and becomes infected, causing great harm.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, take care that no evil accident happens to the patient as we have said, for it is certain without a doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if darkness comes only because of the medicine that has been applied, how effective it is, then you should take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil and glue a bandage to it, and place it on the syphilitic sore; then cure it in ways that are appropriate, until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the upper jaw are broken, one alone or both, for they are two bones; and the one underneath is cartilaginous, and does not break but only dislocates or twists, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should boil your little finger or a needle, and place that broken part inside your index finger, and hold it in place with your thumb, until the nail regrows according to its natural shape; and do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the nose, and you cannot reach it with your fingers, you should place it at the end of a thick piece of wood.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is of two parts, then do likewise, and try to restore it on the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the wounds are healed, then boil some linen bandages at the tip of the nail, if the break is in one part.Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et mette un petus dedens la brisure, et en une partie d’une cotte, et le chief dou neis en l’autre, et li neis entremil, et fai li petuz tan estreins qu’il tene li II pars de la brisure, et li cotte tan lons qu’il tene les II pars entremiles; et metteli sus li neis, si le petus dedens la brisure, et li cotte entremiles.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you tie one to each side of the bone, if the fracture is there; and let the tents be so large that they fill the holes in the bone.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some restorers say that one must moisten the tents with butter, and change them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem good to me, but one should moisten the tent with egg white and flour; then leave it until the bone is hard and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes we put goose feathers in the wound instead of tenting, and then a thin cloth around it, and holds the fracture in place, and blows the patient's breath among them; now do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if warm abscesses arise in the nose while you are working on it, then put on cerate or cotton wetted in rose oil, or a little diaquillon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a hard abscess comes, put on a plaster made from flour of fine wheat and powdered incense, cooked with egg white, then apply it over light dressings and do not tie the nail; and if the fracture in the nail is small, and it is broken into tiny pieces, extract it using suitable instruments for that purpose, then clean the wound and treat it with healing poultices and ointments, and if there is no wound inside the nail, treat it with tent dressings and apply splints until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the dislocation of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is dislocated below, and there is no external wound, and the joint is only slightly displaced without any fracture in the bone, it can be easily recognized.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the dislocation is on the right side, you should insert your right index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the dislocation is on the left side of the jaw, then use the right index finger of the other hand, and gently push it into the dislocation and pull outward with the other hand, keeping the pressure equal on both sides.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jaw is separated into two parts, then you must administer an extension of two parts until it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement of the teeth or dislocation, then bind them with a gold, silver, or silk thread, and then place ceratum on the broken jaw, and lay upon it a double cloth; and place upon the cloth a large well-made splint, or a piece of leather the same size, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it onto the face as tightly as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and to eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the jaw is changing shape, then loosen it after three days, and then reset it to its original position; and apply a poultice over it of powder from the mill with an egg or flour of chickpeas, after you have removed the ceratum; and place over the poultice a light layer of lamb's wool, and if the poultice becomes hot, and the condition of the patient does not change, leave it until it is healed; often it is healed within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if the jaw is dislocated due to moisture, then you must loosen and reset it, and instruct the patient not to move his jaw; and place over it light lamb's wool; and if you see that it is becoming dislocated, then place over it a piece of leather, or a small cloth, or lamb's wool, and the splint, and the ceratum, and the poultice, according to what is needed.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, examine whether any piece of the bone has been removed; then remove it subtly with appropriate instruments for this purpose.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and there remains none, then close the wound, if it is wide, and place upon it an appropriate poultice to encourage flesh growth, until it is healed.
de la forcele	of the scrotum
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The collarbone breaks many times in front, towards the shoulder, and the break occurs in three ways: it can be broken and separated into two pieces, which is the easiest to heal; or there can be a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the treatment is, when there is no wound with the break, to have two assistants: one should hold the shoulder where the collarbone is broken; and the other should stretch the neck towards the affected side. Then, with your fingers, adjust the break so that it is aligned and there is no sign or evidence of the break.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend it further, place a round pillow made of cloth or wool under the shoulder of the patient; and they should relax the collarbone, and you should hold the pillow in your hand, adjusting the break so that it is aligned correctly.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the collarbone out of its socket because it is too deep, then the patient should lie on their back, and place a small pillow under the shoulder, and the assistants should push the shoulder upwards, so that the collarbone bone is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then address the fracture with your hands, and if you find it broken, you should split it open; gently pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined due to any protruding piece, cut it off with one of the knives you have; but place the tool under the forceps to direct the syrup.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	It should be the size of a spoon, and not too thick, as wide as it needs to be according to the size of the bone and the extent of the work; and it must have two heads, as you can see, one wide and the other narrow, according to the shape of the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are sure of a hot abscess, cut the wound, and if the opening is small, or if you doubt there is a hot abscess, pack the wound with bandages and tents according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot absesses come, wet a bandage in rosemary oil and garlic and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The dislocation of the bone, when there is no wound or cut, is to place on the bone the plaster made from mill-powder and egg white, and put light sponges on top, and if necessary, place a spear underneath the splint; then take a very wide band of about 5 inches, and place a folded piece of cloth on top of the sponges and plaster; then take a thin staff of 3 fingers in width and length, and wrap it around the band so that the ends of the band hang down; and place the staff over the fracture, and turn the band up over the neck, and under the healthy shoulder blade, and under the affected shoulder blade; and tighten it from each side, and when you see that the ligature holds the fracture in alignment, and you clearly see that the staff does not move over the broken bone, then adjust it every day, and when the ligature eases, tighten it again; and have the patient lie on his back, and when he sleeps, place a small pillow under the shoulder blade to raise the shoulder; this will ease the dislocation of the collarbone through the stretching of the shoulder, or you can bind the arm to the neck and not release it in case of any adverse events for up to 20 days; then start the plaster again if you see that it is needed, and tighten it and leave it like that until it is healed; it is usually healed within 28 days, but some people heal faster.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Then the shoulder breaks or widens in the middle, and one feels it only by touch; then adjust the apparatus according to the shape of the fracture, and reset it according to its natural form, in every way you can; then put powdered flour on the wound with a lot of egg, and light gauzes, and place a double drape on top; then place a large, thin board on top, a little wider than the shoulder, and if there is any hair under the board on the shoulder, fill those hairs with linen gauzes so that the board lies evenly; then tie it tightly with a large bandage so that the board does not move from its place, and check the ligature every day; and whenever it loosens, tighten it, and adjust the board if it has moved, and let the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder is restored in 20 or 25 days. And when this number of days is complete, loosen it, and be careful, for it is not a bone that sets easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone sticks out above, and not under the heart, then split it open, and the bone, and do as we have said in the dislocation of the shoulder to soothe an abscess with heat.Et se li os est brise, et point tent avant, si met sor le leu de la brisure, un poultice d’uef et de molin, si que li espaule soit frouide; et remettet sor la brisure, un poultice d’uef et de lin, et estoupes legieres, et l’estraint a grant bende.
de la brisure dou pis	of the break in the stone
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The penis is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; it often breaks at the foreskin.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it inclines downwards, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks strength, and feels numb, and perhaps vomits blood, and the hair falls out from the broken bone, and he feels no feeling in it.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is for the patient to lie on his back, and place a pillow between his shoulders, then press his shoulders together and bring the ribs closer together with his hands, making sure the bone is positioned correctly; then apply poultices and bandages over the fracture site, using a light pressure, and wrap it in a cloth, tying it so that it does not move; then wind the bandage around the waist tightly and comfortably, checking every hour to see if it needs tightening; and if there is corrosion or itching or pain or an abscess at the site, quickly remove the bandages and poultices and treat the area as needed; then re-apply the poultice and bandages, tightening them until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the fracture of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	You should know that broken ribs only occur on the large ones in the back and in the chest, and they only bend because they are slippery; this can be discovered through examination of the two areas.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatment is that you set the break even, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, and bind it with a bandage, if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the broken ribs are bent downward, the patient feels great pain and piercing, as with pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane; they also have a cough and vomit a large amount of blood, which is a serious illness, and the elders have given it great concern.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And there are those who say that one should administer foods that swell the belly, in order to push the broken ribs outward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not believe that hot abscesses will come to life unless they have first died down.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some say that one should put cupping glasses over the area to draw out the excess fluids, and this seems reasonable; however, there is a risk that the cupping glass will draw out the vital fluids due to the weakness of the body.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some say that one should cover the area with soft wool soaked in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to apply even pressure all around, then it should be treated with a poultice of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that protrudes through the skin, and there is doubt about the patient, then one should split above the location of the broken rib, and place an instrument underneath to protect the lung; and then one must cut the bone, and gently pull it, and then sew the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if painful abscesses arise, place moistened cloths in rose oil and apply them to the affected area; and treat the area around the abscess as needed, and let the patient lie quietly on his side where it is, until he is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the break in the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes there is a break in the bones of the neck, and it can be bent; and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if he will recover or not, take note if his hands are soft and swollen and dead-looking, and he cannot move them or straighten them out, and when you prick him with a needle, he doesn't feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that in many cases it is fatal; and if he can move them and feels the pain when they are manipulated and pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the illness will be cured if proper treatment is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar condition arises in the spine of the back, and you want to know if he will recover or not, pay attention if his feet are swollen, and if the symptoms are present in his hands, and there is flatulence and urination against his will; and when he lies on his stomach, there is urination against his will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is sleeping on his back and he wants to turn over, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is deadly; therefore do not labor in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not occur, then the condition is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that you apply a hot poultice to the spine if there is an abscess, and then apply one of the comforting and drying ointments, and bind it with a bandage; and instruct the patient to rest and not sleep on the painful part until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is broken, you should cover it with a bandage; and remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a single stitch, then treat it with ointment as needed until it is healed; and if the shoulder-bone is broken, which is called the "bone of the cow," grab your left little finger with your right hand, and apply the poultice and bandage evenly, if you need to; then bind it tightly, and if there is a broken bone, splint it and remove it, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It may happen that the bone of the hip is fractured, and if it does, there will be a slight lessening at the head; and it extends long and declines to the sides, and brings pain to the area, and puncturing, and swelling in the place that is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it, as far as you can reach the fracture; and know which is the fractured part and its shape; and if the fracture is only at the head, then put it back into place so that it is in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture extends long, or declines inward, then let the patient lie on his stomach, as far as the restoration of that fracture can be prepared.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, then apply the plaster, and then put a splint of wood or of horn on top, and hold the fracture still so that it does not move; and treat the area beneath the rib cage until the color is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if swollen abscesses arise, do not touch them until the swollen abscesses are resolved, and apply what we have said before; and then return to restoration, and treat it as appropriate, if there is no bad development; and that is the way to do it.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is that which is between the neck and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it must be restored according to one of two methods. The first method is to take a wooden staff of average thickness, in this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Tie the two ends of a rope to the staff, and pull them upward, and let the patient sit on a chair; then have the patient swing his broken arm over the staff until he feels pain in the shoulder, and put a curve in the staff, then stretch him downward while a helper holds him steady; then have the patient hold the break in place with both hands together, until the break is set as it should be.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	The other method is to have the patient lean forward over his knees, and tie his hand to his neck; then have one minister hold the broken part in place with his hands, and the others pull on each end of the rope, stretching him apart.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, then tighten the ligature below the fracture, and above it, and extend each of the ministers to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is close to the head of the shoulder, then you should put one ligature in the middle below the joint, and another towards the neck, under the fracture; and likewise, if the fracture is towards the neck, then a ligature should be placed lightly and without labor, so that the fracture is even on both sides; then adjust the fracture as it should be, and tighten it, if no abscesses appear.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if a deep abscess comes, do not drain it until the seventh day, and put soft linen in vinegar and rose oil on the abscess, so that the deep abscess is soothed; then drain it, and the way to drain it is to put the ointment on the break, then assemble the arm above the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put the cloth, and drain above the shoulder, and above the arm, so that the arm is in place, if nothing moves it or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone will move, use a splint, and put a larger and stronger splint over the break, with an inch of space between each splint, and let each splint be large enough that it extends 3 inches beyond the break on each side; then drain over the splints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter, more strongly and less slowly.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the setting and tightening, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt an abscess, then leave it bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine the ligature every three days so that itching or swelling does not appear at the site, nor the swelling come to the member because it is too tight.Et se il est ains estrois k’il enfleure et prurite ad esgare, si le deslie un pouce ou deux sus la briseure, et le remets en son leu; et s’il n’est pas trop longement ligiez, il ne puet demorer, mes il velt et revint a son leu.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If you treat it, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents occur, and the dislocation is not reduced within three days or more, let the patient sleep on his back, and place his hands on his stomach; and put beneath the shoulder a cushion filled with wool, evenly packed, and every hour of the day or night, observe that the broken limb does not move, nor become soft in its joints; then treat it with medicine, and give him food as we have already specified, so that the food reaches the innermost parts; and when he begins to recover, let him eat solid food.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to take 40 days to heal; and then one should reset them, and administer baths and ointments to ease the pain.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stricture is ugly and swollen, it will take two or three months to heal.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "ulna" and the "radius". The ulna is smaller and is located near the armpit, while the radius is larger and is situated below the small finger. Sometimes only the large bone breaks, sometimes only the small one, and sometimes both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small vessels are broken, their restoration and healing is easy; but when the large ones are broken, their healing is difficult, and they cause more grief than when they are all broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the small vessel that is broken, then one must gently extend and adjust it.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large vessel, then one must press harder; and he should lie on his back, with his arm raised above his head, and his hand lowered below the other fingers, and he should cross his legs over himself, and the pillow under his head to raise it so that he does not labor at all; then the attendant should extend his arm towards the affected side, either to the elbow or to the wrist, while another attendant holds the arm above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then he places the bandages evenly, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture there are pieces, place each one in its place, and if any stick in the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make an incision through the skin and bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if there is a wound with the fracture, I have spoken about it in the individual chapter; take the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of this restoration abscesses occur, they must be glued over with cerotin made from rose oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft; and then the bandage is applied gently on top, until the hot abscesses are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the cerotin, and apply the plaster of mill-powder with egg white, and then the bandages, and let the bandage on the fracture be a bit stronger and wider than the others; and you should have six bandages on the arm in various positions: if the fracture is in one of the bones, or two; and tighten more over the fracture than anywhere else, lessening gradually as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the bandages on the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or rough; and use a thread made of linen for tightening, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And examine the limb and the joint after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you should wet the limb with warm water until those itches are soothed; and let the limb not be pressed or restricted to rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	Then resume the stretching, and if the ligaments are loosened and the bones displaced, address it similarly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you perceive that the nourishment cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you must loosen it a little and leave it like that for some days, until the nourishment reaches it; and then bind it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have described happen to the patient, then do not release him until 20 days have passed.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Or inquire within, then let him put his hands around his neck, and let his neck be even, and guard against movement and convulsion, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in 30 or 35 days, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the combinations and complexes of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that in the back of the hand and at the base of the fingers there are few fractures, and they only come from bending many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, one should make the patient's arm straight, and have him extend his hand and straighten the broken bones as much as possible; then he should place an emetic on the skin, and if there is no abscess, then he should apply a poultice. Then the patient should rest for 24 hours in a comfortable position, with the affected area elevated above the heart, and keep the wound clean and dry to prevent infection.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is around the stomach of the plant, make a sphere of fabrics, and instruct the patient to hold it against their broken plant; then stretch it with a long strip of fabric, and hold the cloth in place with a hot candle as big as the palm of your hand, stretching it as needed.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is on the outside, you should place one cloth on top and another underneath the plant, so that the hand is open and straight; then bind it all around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture is on one of the fingers, if it's the thumb, set it straight as needed and hold it in place; and if the fracture is on another finger, like the index finger or another, straighten it and bind it to the adjacent healthy finger; or you can bind them all together, whichever is easier, or you can place a cloth on top, like a poultice; take care with the restoration and treatment of a hot abscess, and dry up any fluid that arises, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bones of the thigh are often broken, and one can see this when they move forward and backward; their restoration is by binding one above the fracture and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then each assistant stretches their band to their side equally; and this is when the fracture is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, one of the ligatures should be towards the buttock, and the other ligature below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is near the knee, then the ligature should be on the side of the knee, and the extension should be below; then put the mirror so that the bone is equal to its natural shape with his two hands, until it is straight according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, unless an abscess comes out.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside and then return to your work and treatment; the bandage is done in the following way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	You should wrap a hard double folded bandage around the fracture, and leave off the excess, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the thigh, and tie a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee on the side, and let the end of the thread come up above; then go back over the leg and thigh with the bandage, then put the splints over the fracture, and put one splint over the bone of the leg; then stretch the space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths to make the ligature equal, then begin to tie it tightly in 3 or 4 places over the fracture; and the more you go above the fracture, the less you tighten it; then feel both ends of the thread that you have tied between the leg and the thigh, and tie 3 splints that are on top, then go back down to the foot at the end of the thread, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like that, until an abscess or swelling comes, or something similar.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if something happens there, then loosen it and address what is happening, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone sticking out, they should be removed if possible; and if not, then the area should be split open and the wound cleaned, as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thigh is broken in this way when splints are placed on it, as in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, with treatment made in this way, the patient is not healed.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And you shall know that the leg is restored in one day or a little less or more, according to the different complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the groove of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the groove of the knee there is little breakage, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, then there is only a split or perforation; and it happens to all injuries, whether with pain or not, and everyone feels it.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is to put it back in place with the fingers, as long as it can be; then apply the plaster, and if necessary, put on a round splint, and bind it as it should be, then follow all the instructions we have given for other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar conditions; then treat each incident as needed until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by the right name "mustelz" and the other is called "foscile"; and all injuries happen as they do in the arm, and therefore its restoration is the same as that of the arm, and its operations are all the same. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns upside down everywhere.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if only the small bones are broken, then it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, then one feels great pain and sees it clearly; and it turns inside out.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Therefore, bring about an extension, and make it even, and tie the splints evenly; but nevertheless, if the fracture is ugly, and there are several pieces, then the extension should be less and lighter; and adjust according to your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two wooden splints that reach from the top of the leg to below the knee on either side; then wrap two bandages around them, one above and one below, and tie it in the middle as well, and at this point the leg should not be able to bend to the right or left, and thus it is well; and some administer a wooden bar that extends from the top of the leg, and they place the leg upon it so as to prevent movement, and properly they apply it at the break where there is pain; and move the leg every day to check for any hot abscesses or other accidents; and treat until healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	from the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the foot there can be a fracture and in both feet, and there is only bruise in various positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	If the leg bone is broken and you see the bones protruding above each other, then have the patient lie on his back as if he were walking, and then place your foot on top of his, where the bones are raised, and then press down until they return to their places; then apply the ointment and bandages, and put a small, flat stone under the arch of the foot, and then bind it firmly in place with bandages and other materials as needed.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones healed, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the toes are broken, treat them as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place a splint along the length of the toe, making it slightly larger, and place under the foot the stone that I have described, and bind it firmly in place; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, place a splint on each toe according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and tighten the stone underneath the foot; and let the top of the stone press firmly against the sole of the foot.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, from what we have already discussed; and treat each case as it requires.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone of the finger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bones of a woman's nature are broken, make her sit with her legs apart, then tilt her to the side towards her back, and have the wound filled with cotton, and place a stone the size of an egg inside; then help the woman stand up, and gently press her back little by little, and then the cotton will come out as it enters the nature, and the bone will return with the stone; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back in, and do this for seven days: the fracture will be restored. Then take a sheep's bladder, tie a cane to the opening, fill the entire bladder inside the nature; then blow into the cane firmly, until the bladder is inflated within: the nature will return the fracture; then have it filled with cotton, and leave it like that for several days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the man's or woman's finger is broken, treat it as we have said for the hip bone; and these breaks are not hidden from him who devotes himself to studying and understanding my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the breaks show in many ways the right way to restore them; understand this therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	For a broken penis, take a goose's gullet and insert the penis into it; then wrap a cloth around it and leave it for three days, checking on it occasionally, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, or similar, to be bled immediately, in accordance with the bleeding we have described earlier.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, then remove the vitriol, if you don't have anything else, and then start to reset the fracture in that same hour, or that day, if no abscesses appear.Et si la brisure est en jointe de corps, ou il n’y a pas de plaie, s’il le peut demourer ains que il n’y ait pas de contusion ou de lesion, qu’il demoure assiez sans se muevre, si com nos avons dit avant.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the fracture is in a joint of the body, or there is no wound, if it can remain without movement causing contusion or injury, it should remain seated and still as we have said before. And if abscesses appear, then leave the reset until the next day, as long as the abscesses are soothed, and don't touch them on the third or fourth day, because you would bring about a bad accident.Et si li membres sont contuziez ou les os briziez, et qu’il ne demourent pas adés, si covient que tu remettes le membre a son leu, et le repos par tuit le jor, et la nuit, et la matinee, et par tuit l’endit qu’il doit demourer asez.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is apparent on the uncovered heart, then you must gently put it in place with your hands, with a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not apparent to you to make it equal with your hands, then reset it with this instrument which is made of iron and is seven or eight inches long, and the width is according to the amount of the injury; and for this reason, it is necessary for the surgeon to press into the wound three or four times, according to what he needs in each case of broken bone; and let it be round and somewhat thick so that it does not bend under pressure on the limb while you are working, and let it be pointed at the end, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called «palainche», because the curved head of the bone should be placed on top of the visible bone; and it is bound in place once, so that it may return to its original position and be even with the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle and the instrument cannot grip the bone well, then you must cut off the head of the bone so that the instrument can grasp it firmly.Et se li brisure sunt en un os qui ne se puet bien appercevoir, si covient que tu l’enleves adessable, si com il tuit est, et si le retournes a son leu.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then cut it with a suitable instrument, either an incision or a saw, according to your ability; then take out what remains in the bone of splintered pieces and small fragments.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, you will know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	Then have it so that it is in its place, then soak the cloth in red wine, and use it to clean the wound if it is dirty; and do not put any ointment or other substance on the wound that would cause pus and corruption to form; then administer bandages after you have reset the bone, and leave the wound exposed, and cover all around it according to the size of the wound; and take great care so that the wound is not constricted by the binding. And many a fool has done this and caused death or gangrene in the patient; and the constriction should be looser than for other injuries.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is large or deep, and you doubt that a bad accident will occur as we have said, and you feel pain in the area, then bandages should not be put on it; but wrap around, instead of bandages, hard rags, and tie them tightly.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days swelling around the wound, then remove what you have put on top and apply healing ointment to wounds, such as four-drug ointment and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you should loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is healed and closed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And one must prepare the limbs in such a way that the bowstring runs smoothly downward.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they persist for many days, and it cannot heal but keeps dislocating the bowstring, know that there are tiny pieces of bone causing this, so you must probe the wound with a needle, and remove all the broken pieces causing the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula or other form of corruption occurs, then you must treat it according to what he said in the chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, such as the thigh or shoulder bone, and similar large bones, do not treat it at all, for many die from it, but leave it to heal over twenty or thirty days; then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of bruises that come upon the healing
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	There are many times after the healing of a fracture, especially when it is near a joint, that an ugly sight appears in the member; and by chance the member cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care then that the patient is free of moisture: if the medic gives astringent remedies such as aloe, incense, myrrh, sarcocolla and similar, so that you grind one or all of these substances together and mix them with wine, vinegar, egg white, or garlic; and put it on the night-time as poultices, and hold it firmly in place and do not remove it for several days; then remove it and start again until the swelling is gone. Or press it onto a well-made piece of plaster; for the property of plaster is that it removes all swellings from the limbs; if the swelling has become as hard as stone, and there is a need to remove it, cut into it, and make the excess apparent; or have it cut by some surgeon so that it is removed and healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb which is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is healed, and the limb remains weak and thin, this happens for many reasons: one is that it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and the limb could not receive nourishment; or due to excessive swelling; or due to too much movement, and not at the right time; or because there is a lack of blood in the body, and so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you should make the patient eat and drink to soften his body so that blood multiplies within him; and give him a bath, and joy and relaxation; then apply pitch to the affected member, so that the pitch attracts it to itself greatly, and often wash it with warm water until the pitch is drawn out to the member and it returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	and the limb straightens after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the member is crooked after healing, and the broken bone opens, and the shape of the member is deformed, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function; yet one must not believe foolish people who say that the limb should be broken again completely anew, and many fools have done this in our land; and these actions are blamed, and great harm results, and sometimes death; nevertheless, if the dislocations and tortures are recent, one should wash them with warm water, or cook softening herbs such as marshmallow leaves, and roots, and mallow, and similar medicines that soften. And you make a soothing ointment, such as well-prepared diaquilon, and you take the mucilage of marshmallow, and confit it with goose fat or sesamen oil, and apply it as an ointment; or you take figs, and grind them with colon fodder, and similar medicines that soften.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the dislocation is caused by continuous and prolonged rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And you must move the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the crookedness is awoken and hardened like stone, and it needs to be removed with iron, then one must cut it to the bone with a subtle incision; and apply poultice and care in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs in someone, one must now reset it without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the place will swell, and if one tries to reset it, one might do so with pain; therefore one should not move it when it is swollen: many times this brings on spasm and other pains; nevertheless, when this happens, let the patient be bled, then let him rest until the abscesses are drained; then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each member as the healing comes.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have arranged the chapters on dislocations of the head down to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Then the jaws become dislocated and the dislocations of both are in two ways: they are slightly displaced from their place and softened a little; or they are entirely dislocated and hang down towards the feet, and saliva flows from the mouth which he cannot hold back, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is enveloped with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns through various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is complete and accomplished, then you should reset it quickly without delay; and in such a way that the minister grabs the head of the patient, and blocks his nostrils with one of his fingers at the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and let the other two fingers be free, to press evenly; and instruct the patient to relax his jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And she looks at it equally, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is stuck, especially if both jaws are together, then they should be soaked in warm water and oil, so that they are gently reset; do not pull hard on the jaw, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back to the same position, and the mouth of the patient is closed well without softening, then place it on wet sheets with a cerote made of rose oil and wax, and then lightly bind it with soft bonds; and let the patient sleep on his back, and let his head be between two cushions, so that he does not move it to the right or left, nor does he exert himself to chew, but takes light food, until the pains are removed, and the jaw is bound and healed. Then he can eat whatever he wants lightly, and does not strain himself to open his mouth to eat and drink, until the jaw is well bound and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be reset in an hour and are not converted to their place, then come fever and usual sickness, and perhaps intestinal distress, and perhaps vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is deadly; and many die from it within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceless cannot dislodge from the ribs within its continuance of the armpit, and it is dislodged sometimes to the outside, and they feel it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back and stretches out his arms; then press the place firmly with your palm, and it will return to its place; then apply the ointment and bandage it, and tie it; and the shoulder joint which is towards the neck cannot be dislocated; if it is, and it dislocates again at any time, reset it in its place as we have said; then apply the ointment and bandage, and tie it, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed; and thus also is the shoulder joint returned when it has been dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: one way is that it dislocates at the part of the armpit below; the second is at the part of the foot; and occasionally it dislocates at the part above, and this happens rarely; it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor inside for the nerves; and often it dislocates below towards the armpit, especially in those who are thin, for in them it is forced out; but in those who are plump, it pops out and goes back in smoothly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men that they get a concussion or a fracture, and the shoulder swells from a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore you must test it until you are certain of its effectiveness; then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And you can identify a dislocation when it is down towards the armpit, and you will see a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear distinction between them; and you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and under the armpit at the top of the shoulder, just as if there were an eye; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move in any way; and likewise, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you will see it clearly at the touch; and this type of dislocation is not difficult to fix when it is new, or if the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the minister lifts the hand of the sick person up high, then places his fingers under the shoulder blade, and raises the joint with force to its place; and the minister lifts the hand and extends it upward, then lowers it; and it will come back into place quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and they should be given soothing and softening ointments, such as a decoction of altis, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and they should be rubbed down; then the patient should lie on their back, and a thin mattress placed underneath them, neither too soft nor too firm, then place the pillow under their heel, and lift the shoulder gently, and pull the hand of the affected side; while another minister holds the head of the affected side so it does not move downward; this shoulder will return immediately, and if you see that it is not returning, do it according to this manner: and have a man present who is larger than the patient; he should stand straight toward the armpit, and push the shoulder underneath the arm of the patient, and lift the arm up so that the patient hangs in the air; and another minister pulls the hand of the affected side downward toward the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	If the patient is too light, one can add some weight to him, and the dislocation will return right away.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And one can also reset it in another way: one should insert a long stick into the ground, so that the shoulder is as straight as a pencil, neither too thick nor too thin; then it should be placed under the patient, but with a soft cloth over it, and the patient should be standing upright; then his hand should be stretched out below on the other side, and the joint will return to its place suddenly; and if it does not return due to all these things that we have said, then perform this cure: take a stick two arms long and four digits wide, which has a pointed end to go deep under the shoulder, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then tie a soft cloth to the end of the stick so that the stick does not hurt the patient, then place it under the joint of the patient; stretch out his arm along the length of the stick, and tie the shoulder to the stick, and the arm to the head of the stick; then place the arm on top of a pillow, and stretch out the hand below, and let the body hang on the other side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, in whatever way it is, you should then place a woolen sphere under the joint, then apply the prepared plaster made from mill dust, incense, and egg white, all over the shoulder and around it; then tighten it under the joint gradually, and tie the string onto the plaster, and hold the hand to his chest, and let the hand remain like this.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And he must eat little, as long as the limb is comfortable, for it will heal faster; and then eat more after five or seven days, and move it; and if it is stiff and not softened, it will be healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has come out of place due to moisture that it has acquired, or for any other reason, then you should administer cautery at three openings, as it is described in the chapter on cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this and it still dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot lift his arm upwards, then you should know that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are torn or stretched or relaxed; and you should know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocation that is towards the bottom, and the breasts, or behind, is done by pushing and stretching with the hands, and one should treat it in the same way until it is healed.And if there is dislocation of the jaw, one should not let the patient eat anything hard for as long as the joint is uncomfortable, so that it can heal quickly; and then he can eat more after five or seven days, and move his jaw; and if it is stiff and not softened, it will be healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing, there is pain in the limb, and with movement, the patient suffers many times, until that pain is relieved and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	from the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated by pins, and it returns with pins; and if it is dislocated everywhere, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not reduced, for one sees and feels it well, and it dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick neck with the healthy one, then you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is crooked and cannot bend its arm or touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must reset it so that the abscesses heal, for if the abscesses heal, then it will be painful to reset; and by chance it may not be able to be fully reset, especially when it is in the back; so it is worse than other dislocations, and causes more pain, and death may result.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it can be reset, that you extend its hand with your two hands; and its arms should be spread out, and the hands bent according to the elbow, around and underneath, and push the joint into its socket at its wrist, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it will return when he bends his hand towards his hand, and strain at the root of the palm where it is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, then it must be forcefully extended; and there are two ministers who extend the arm, and two others who hold it so that it does not move during extension; then the arm is bent on each side after you have wrapped a long and wide cloth around it; and when the minister has joined the joint with his hand, he anoints it with some oil to soften the joint, then closes the joint firmly, as much as possible; and when it is in place, he applies a dry poultice with egg white, then tightly binds the arm to the neck of the sick person, and leaves it for several days, then loosen it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, then loosen the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not healing well, then reapply the poultice and the bandage, and leave it for some days until it is firmly in place; then loosen it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels pain after the joint is moved back into place and it still hurts, then bathe and rub it gently, and press until it is soothed; or put a poultice of fat mutton on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and let him enter the bath; and when he sweats, rub the joint gently, then put the poultice back on, and then enter the bath; and do this two or three times until he is healed; and if you see that, put moist cow dung heated with butter on top, and press it on; then it will return to its natural state.
li dislocation de la main	dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand is healed, and its return is lighter than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place gently, in the same hour that it was dislocated, so that the joint swells or an abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And for the movement, put the sick hand on a table, and extend the fingers, and look at putting it in an even position, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and bend it until it returns to its natural state; however, you must also check if it is in the right place; then put the sick person's backhand on a table and extend it and move it.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, then let the patient lie with his back to his hand on the table, and the assistant places his hand over that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it goes back into place now, that is good. If not, then strain it with soothing poultices on abscesses, and leave it like that without re-enunciating.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, then let the joint stay crooked; and do not hurt the patient more than when his hand is weakened, and he cannot hold anything: then know that the nerves are cut, or an artery; there is no other remedy except straining by cautery near the spot, and perhaps nothing else helps.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, then put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then hold it and leave it for .v. days, then loosen and leave it like that.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is any swelling, then wet it with warm water and rub it until it heals.Et s’il adons li viens de l’engien qui li i a en la maint, si le frote aigue chaude et li met sus l’emplaustre susdiz.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the two fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the bones of the hand are dislocated on each side, sometimes on the back of the palm or on the inside; then they are bent, and you put the dislocation in your pouch until it goes back into place, then support the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated; and leave it for two days, and then put it straight that day; and do not bind it, as we have said, and loosen it at night, and make it move, and bind it again at night; and do this often, until it is healed. And do the same, if it is dislocated on the inside of the hand, and do as you did before, until it is healed. And do the same if it is dislocated in another place.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	from the dislocation of the shoulder blade from the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder blade or collarbone is dislocated, there is no remedy, for death hastens the malady.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the egestions escape without voluntary effort, and he cannot hold them in, and many times a limb becomes paralyzed, either both thighs or both arms or one; and often the shin mutates into four parts; that which occurs at the back is called "gilbositez": the cure is to find out whether the gilbositez occurred in childhood; if not, there is no cure nor salvation from it.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which occurs from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of cure described at great length, but I have abbreviated it according to my understanding, and have devised instruments in diverse ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the gilbositeit that comes to the toe in front, there is no healing; and also that which occurs directly on both sides, and one cannot cure it without that which comes properly to the back, as I said; and it happens that the patient stretches his face in one place evenly, and has an extension underneath him so that he does not bend; then insert a stake at the head into the ground, and another at the feet, and tie a string under the seat of the dislocation, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles; and two attendants hold the strings, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the stakes; and they are well tied, the stake as we have said, and the physician places his palms on the spine firmly, until it is healed.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return with this treatment, then take a table three yards long, and lie under the wall, and let the patient be on their side, and place the end of the table under the wall, then put the middle of the table on the spine; and let the patient put their feet on the other end of the table, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see that, do it in the turn that turns to the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And you should nail two torches to the end of the patient's arm, and two others by their feet, and have between each torch, above and below, a palm's width of space in length; and have in each torch an opening where the rope runs through, and the torches are firmly in the ground so that they do not move; and between each pair of torches there is a turning torch, over which the ropes turn, and on the two turning torches there are two small torches a palm in length for turning the pulley; and then tie the rope that is among the pulleys to the pulley toward the head, and the other rope to the other pulley, and each of the ministers turns their pulley to all the rope, and the master puts the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, then apply a desiccant poultice with plenty of egg white, and then the tow, and then the tile of a three-foot-long board, which purples the area of the hunchback and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage, as we have said, and use the patient for subtle cooling until he is healed; and if anything comes in the end of health, then one must administer softening and soothing medicines, with the tile that we mentioned earlier; and sometimes they administer a piece of lead, and sometimes the appearance comes on the back spine, and one thinks it is dislocation; and it is the bone that protrudes, so one must not have presumption: it might bring about death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	You know that in the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only dislocations occur, not as in other joints; and the hip joint is divided into four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and most inside, and less so in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, the diseased one is longer and the diseased knee more prominent than the healthy one, and the diseased one cannot bend its knee towards the fire; and the area which is nearby is swollen with a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh bone comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of those to whom it comes from the inside, it is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of those who get it from the front are that their leg is well according to its condition; nevertheless, they cannot bend their knee without pain, and if they want to walk, they cannot go forward, and they retain their urine, and the anger swells, and when they walk, they pass over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of the one whom it happens to in the back, is that he cannot spread his knee, nor bend it, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The remedies for this type of dislocation are that you examine whether the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its condition, and there is no treatment; and he must not be presumptuous.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for the one who has a fresh dislocation, and it is of the four types of dislocation, you should quickly turn the joint, and stretch it in and out, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will return, and no other treatment is needed.Et si ne revenra pas, sache que c’est des  .iiij. manieres de dislocations; et si est qu’il demoure au leu selonc sa disposition, si covient qu’il ait cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this way, then you must prepare a strong minister, and stretch the leg very hard with two hands, or with a strap tied above the knee; and another minister stretches his hand above in such a way that he presses his hands under his heels, then tie him with a strong strap above the thigh; and another holds the head with a strap; and they all pull up and down at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground at once and remains dangling.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This stretching manner is common to all four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, that is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, then you must apply pressure to the affected side. When the dislocation is in the shoulder, you should support the patient on his healthy side, then place the strap over the root of the thigh, and over the part below the armpit; then tighten the strap towards the armpit and towards the elbow. Then another minister should grab the patient's arms and squeeze the fleshy part of the thigh, and stretch it forcefully: the joint will return to its place immediately. This type of dislocation is the easiest to treat.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot reduce it in the manner we have described, then you must tie the patient's two feet together with a strong woolen cord around the ankles and knees, and the affected leg should be extended two fingers more than the other; then let him be hung from the end of a pole, with his arms outstretched above him about a length of an arm; then command a minister to hold the top of the thigh, and another minister who hangs with the patient to hold the thigh firmly, for the joint will now quickly return to its place.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is reduced, let the patient lie as we have described in the case of sciatica, and loosen the ligature on the affected leg, and also on the buttock; then place two hot coals, one at the head and one at the foot, and place a hot coal between the buttocks of the patient; and have a pile of moist cloths ready, so that he does not burn himself, then extend each minister towards him, and the surgeon must apply pressure on the dislocation with his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it goes back, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place him on the table and press him as we have said in the section on dislocations, and lay the patient on his sound side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is forward, then one should stretch the affected leg gently, and according to what I have said; and place his weight upon the sore joint, then press with the other hand, and the leg will move downward toward the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is in the hip, one must not stretch the patient downward or raise him up, but he should be positioned as if his hip were dislocated on one side, just as we described for lying on both hips; and he should lie on his face, with the leg stretched out as we said before, and someone should press down on the joint while he is on the table; and when the patient extends his legs and they are even, then adjust the thighs, apply the plaster, and restrain it with a bandage so that the hip doesn't move; and let him rest for three or four days, then loosen the bandage and apply the plaster again; and if you see that they are even, then restrain it as before and leave it for three days; then loosen the bandage and let him walk comfortably until his limbs are strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of a dislocated knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in 3 ways: that is to know, inside and outside, and behind; and it does not dislocate in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the sign is that you command the patient to bend their leg at the thigh, and if it does not straighten at the thigh, then you know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all [dislocations] is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend their leg if they can, and put your back on their face, and put their foot on your feet; then take their knee in your palms, and pull between your fingers, then bend both sides of the knee firmly; and another minister extends their foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it straightens its leg at the thigh easily; and put the plaster on, and let the leg air-dry at the thigh, and bind them together tightly for three or four days, then release it; and the patient should not exert themselves in walking until the limb is healed.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the member is not at all, then administer strong stretching, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	Heels are sometimes split, and sometimes fully dislocated, inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it hurts when touched in the affected area; the movements are light, and one should gently stretch it with their hands when it is only slightly dislocated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely healed, you should make the patient sit up straight, and hold his leg firmly by the ankle; then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then stretch it upwards, and gently pull the foot upwards; do this twice as we have said, by bending and pulling the foot; if it goes back into place, that is good; if not, repeat the procedure, for it will go back in; and if it cannot be reduced in this way, make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and fix the strap firmly in the ground between his buttocks, and wind cloth around it so that it does not slide; then one person holds the leg firmly, and another stretches the foot upwards with their hands or with a rope tied to the ankle; then stretch each person equally, and have the strap held tightly between the patient's buttocks to hold him in place as he is stretched; then put your fingers over the dislocation, and another person pulls on the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will quickly go back into place.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is at its worst, then put the plaster and bandages on, and tighten it firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, and be careful of the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the ligature is not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligature loosens, then tighten it again; then untie it after a third or fourth day, and let the patient walk after four days; and if he walks before that time, there is no guarantee that he will not relapse.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if hot abscesses come, you must calm them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
des dois	and if it comes from fever or from a cold, or from a disease of the bed, or from a disease of the litter, you treat him in the manner that we have said;
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the arms are dislocated, they must be carefully extended without effort, and this is an easy matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any part of the foot, you should make the patient sit on a flat surface or a table that is completely level, and put your foot on what is exposed of the joints, then press your foot firmly, until it goes back into place; and when it is even again, and nothing is exposed, put a two-legged board under the sole of the foot, then tighten it firmly, and leave it for three days, then untie it; and let him rest until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation and you want to restore it, many times the patient dies: so do not be presumptuous in the cure unless you are wise in the art and have used it for a long time, and unless you are compassionate and merciful and slow to anger; and at the beginning use things that soothe hot abscesses, and leave the patient in the hand of God if you do not see hope of healing; and when you see hope, then immediately move the limb back into place so that the hot abscesses heal; and when the limb is in place, administer soothing hot abscess remedies, and treat the wound as it should be done with drying ointments; and if there is a fracture and broken bones, set the bones and do what we have said for simple diseases; and beware of falling into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for this will bring change according to your Creator, and for the safety of your soul and body.
Amen	So be it.
