O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, my very dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the knowledge of medicine along with its fulfillment, and have made an end through its expositions and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hands, namely "surgery."
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of the hands is neglected in our region and is foreign to all, there remains little knowledge and understanding of it except for slight descriptions in books by the ancients which the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come errors and vanities, and intentions are closed off and knowledge is kept distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Here it seems to me that I should animate it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and of abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the instruments of cautery, and of other tools of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of the hand are found in our time, the art of medicine has been neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for one who engages in this to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the number of bones, and the movement and of the veins moving and resting, and where their exits are.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And because Hypocrites says that what is known by name is much, and what is known by action is little; and the same is true in the art of medicine.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously mentioned, must be careful that he does not make mistakes and harm people; just as I have seen many of those who meddle in this science and then abandon it without knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish doctor who lanced an abscess of scrofula on a woman's neck, and he also cut the arteries in the neck; as a result, so much blood poured out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another doctor who treated a stone in a man's testicle, and the stone was large; he took out a part of the bladder with it, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if they cut it out he would surely die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another knight who was healing a duke from our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound; and the ignorant healers applied the break on top of the wound using a strong pressure, and they did not leave any poultice on the wound, and they left it like that with one end; and he commanded that it should not be touched; and it stayed like that until the leg became completely swollen, and the foot too, and it came to perdition.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to loosen the leg; and when I loosened it he felt at ease and had no more pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	However, the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and I could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the limb was completely destroyed.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another knight who punctured an abscess that was encrusted and then inflamed due to the wickedness of his lord.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a ulcer, when it is pure of the black humor, one should not touch it with iron unless in such a place that one can completely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And because of this, dear reader, you need to know that the work of the hands is divided into two parts: that is, where there is danger in many positions; and I will show in each section of this book where there is danger and peril.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Because of this, it is necessary that you be careful, so that the foolish people cannot speak ill of you. Take up your weapons in confidence, and approach your illnesses with ease and determination, using the best methods so that through God's grace you may achieve salvation and be praised; leave behind terrible illnesses of great suffering; remove your weapons from whatever causes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may pass from this world into one of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in some of his warnings: "Do not take on a sick person's illness, lest you be called a foolish man.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cautery and medicinal water cautery; it is the chapter ordered from the head to the feet, and about the forms of instruments, and about cautery tools, and all that is necessary in the craft.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and it is the chapter ordered and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twisting injuries, and similar ailments; it is arranged from the head to the feet, and concerns the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	So, as we remember the work, it is fitting that I describe the nature of aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the most lengthy discussion and subtle science, and the secret responses; and the majority of sages spoke about this and agreed on it; and I am satisfied with their words, for I prefer brevity.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery aids universally in all complexes where there is matter, whether .ij. complexes: namely, hot complex without matter, and dry complex without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions, some people said that cautery is very helpful; others said the opposite, that cautery is not effective for diseases caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	Because fire's nature is hot, it should not be treated with heat or dryness; and those who say the contrary claim that cautery helps hot and dry diseases that originate in people's bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	Because when you compare the human body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find the body to be cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found this to be true through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And yet, one should not undertake this without first having experienced it themselves, and understanding through long practice the nature of cauteries, and the diversity of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and their outcomes and the timing; we have no fear of the other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the physicians agreed and concurred about the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that cautery combines fire with the secrets of cures, and is a greater good than burning cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and it does not spread beyond the cooked member, nor harm any other member if properly used.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Burning medicines move from one member to another by removing diseases of great suffering; and perhaps they kill the patient because of their intensity and the goodness of their substance, if there is an excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have discovered this through experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and been placed under the truth of things; and because of this, I excuse myself from the length of speech, for it does not please me to take away from you the secret that is reserved for fire, and the quality of the work, describing how it heals illnesses in bodies, as the philosopher explains through demonstration; now receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed upon the time when cauteries should be performed, and chose a favorable moment.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the underlying harm is removed by the aid of cautery; and especially if the cautery is for pressing pains that are sudden and urgent and cannot wait until a more convenient time.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear son, as the foolish do; for a disease that is healed by cautery has no recurrence; and they say so, but it is not true as they believe, because cauteries are not medicines that move the complexions, and dry up the humors that cause pain, and are worth more than medicine for their swiftness and virtue and authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease will sometimes return according to the complexion of the malady and its location and nature; and the excesses are assembled within it through the digestion of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered to remove the excesses and moisture, as with tooth cauteries for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but that rarely happens.And know, son, that they agreed upon the time when cauteries should be performed, and chose a favorable moment.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and it is evident; but they do not believe that cauteries are worthwhile after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in any illness and they are ineffective, then we administer the cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauteries of gold instruments are milder than those of iron, and they said this because of the nature of gold and its high quality; and they said that the heat of the cautery does not cause swelling, but this is not true, as I have tested and found to be the case in some men.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	Nevertheless, when you heat the gold instrument, you do not know when it is hot by its color, and it cools down immediately; and if it is heated too much, it is done in the fire, and so there is enough hindrance.Et quant tu chaufes estrument de fer, tu le sais bien a la calor que il est chaus por la noirceur del, et s’il n’est pas trop chaus il reste chaud longuement; si si li eschaude trop, il se rompt et n’a point d’empechement.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this, we use fire cautery which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have ordered this chapter on the head and neck, so that the path may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	on olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and coldness on the brain, and there are two types made for different causes: one for a condition called "soda", which is caused by various humors descending from the head to the eyes and ears; also for many ailments caused by coldness, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a purifying medicine, cleansing the head for three or four nights, depending on what the strength, age, and condition of the patient can bear; then have the head of the patient shaved.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then let the patient sit cross-legged in your lap, and place his hands on his lap; afterwards, place the root of your palm between his eyes, where his nose bridges his two eyes, and heat up the cautery, which is called "olivare," with which this is done.
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the marked spot, and move your hand up and down while rotating it; then lift your hand gently, and examine the spot to see if there is a small bone fragment; and if you don't see one, repeat the cautery until you do as I have instructed. Then take a little salt, put it in a piece of cloth, and place it on the spot; leave it for three days; then apply an ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients say that when an open wound persists for longer, it purges more, and for this reason, it helps to use leeches.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some say that one should leave the cautery on long enough to burn a part of the bone, and then have the burned part of the bone cut out and cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one should leave the cautery on so long as to burn away a piece of bone as large as a woman's thimble, in order for the humors to flow out; then the wound must be left open for a long time, and afterwards it is cured and seared.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And I do not consider these two methods of cauterization to be good in every way, except in some people where there is a fear of fainting; and I would rather leave it untouched, for the shoulder is weakened by continued dislocations, as we see in other members; and likewise when the shoulder of the patient is weak from nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more saving and mild for me, and therefore I practice this method.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When chronic pain comes throughout the head and lasts a long time, one should use herbs and pills for the sick, which are called 'cochie', as well as purgatives for the head, oils, and plasters; and if they are given the cautery that we have mentioned before, but it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the sick person is not of a cold nature, and is not too cold; then cauterize it with that cautery a little bit as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After that, cauterize each horn of the head up to the bone as we have said before, and do .i. cautery in the place where one puts leeches; there is .i. place for which one uses cupping glasses; and lighten your hand so that you do not reach the bone: the patient feels much greater pain from this cautery than from the others, and I will speak about it later; and the cauteries on the horns should be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and it is .i. form:
dou cautere dou chief	The horns which are on the head of the sick person, if they are in their nature of coldness and dryness, and of bone-holding; therefore, one should make the cauteries that are placed on them subtle to the string of the ox, and subtle to the others that are mentioned above.
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in the head there is sudden pain and the disease extends to the eye, and the shoulder is cleansed with purifying medicines, and one has done the other remedies that I have said about diseases, and all this does not help; then you should do cauteries according to two ways, that is to say of medicine and of fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery of medicine with garlic is that you take a clove of garlic and remove the skin and wrap it in a piece of cloth, then make an incision where the pain is located so that you can place the clove of garlic underneath the skin; and when it has been placed, tie it tightly and leave it for twelve hours; then untie it and move away from the clove of garlic, leaving the wound for two or three days; then apply a poultice of cotton soaked in butter until healing occurs.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the wound is healed, if you see that it is necessary, do cauteries with some burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth chapter on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The cautery of iron is as follows.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery with which it is formed:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "cauterization" because the head is made in the shape of a claw with a small curve, and in the middle there is a small appearance; and place it on the painful area, and hold your hand and turn it slightly so that half of the thickness of the heart is burned; and remove your hand so that the artery does not blaze, which is forced out, and abundant blood flows.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	Afterwards, put cotton in wine vinegar, and apply it to the area for three days; then put wet cotton soaked in butter, and then heal the area with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this hemorrhoid with the cautery that is called "cultellare", which has a pointed tip, be careful not to cover the artery in this hemorrhoid, which is not old.
de emigraine	of hemorrhoids
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat hemorrhoids as we have previously described in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cauteries previously mentioned in medicine and fire do not help him, then you must heat the cautery that is called  "cultellare" until it is white; and then sign on the painful area a line half a finger long, and remove your hand once, and stretch it so that you do not cover the artery and it reaches to the bone; and be careful of the mandible that mutes when one chews, and let the mute and spasms come to the patient, and be careful of the blood flow from the artery when it is covered, or covering has great fear and likewise for those who are unaccustomed and inexperienced; and leave the wound in mid-healing; but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding of the artery when it is covered, and I will show you where it opens in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize them in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has .ij. knives; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of pain in the ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ear persists from cold, and one has applied dissolving medicines and other treatments that we have described in the previous chapter, and the pain does not go away, then heat this cautery, called 'point', which has this shape:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you have punctured all around the ear that is sick, or both if the pain is in both, and then move a little above from the root of the ear where you have marked the place; and have .x. points around each ear; after cure the area until it is healed.Et se tu vois que la dolor ne se mute pas, poins tout le costé de l’oreille qui est contrainct de froit, et t’esloigne vers la racine; et si li dolors ne se mute, poins entor les  .ij. oreilles tant qu’il soit saine, car il adoncque deffaut de nature.
de la torture de la bouche	of mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	[There is no need for cautery in those ulcers which are due to flux, as we have said in the sections on diseases; nor should cautery be applied to those that arise from dryness and inflammation of nerves.]
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this kind of mouth torture that arises from flux of humors and discharges from the head, and gargling does not help, then you must cauterize the patient with . three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little way above the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; and apply the cautery to the part that appears healthy, and cauterize the top of the ear just beneath the horn of the head, and another cautery in the temple as long as a thumb; and leave the cautery in place until half of the brain is burned; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the appearance of the knife is as we have described before, but it should be a little more flexible, and the knife itself should be a little thicker; afterwards, treat the area as I have described before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but it does not help, and the patient has a fever, then do four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one where the spot called 'vassels' is located, as we mentioned earlier; and the last cautery is on the stomach's mouth. And let it be treated as we said before.
de litargie	of litharge
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient large and purifying pills for the brain; then, shave the head of the patient all over, and apply a liniment of mustard to the back of the neck; and here is how to do the cautery: perform it as I have described.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is healed like this, it is good; and if not, do three cauteries in the middle of the head, descending to the neck, with a distance of two fingers between each cautery; and cure him as the others, and if you see the need, and the patient is suffering, do one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, do two more on the two horns, and cure him as before. And let it be the cautery called 'olivare', as I mentioned earlier.
de la froidor dou chief	of coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to cleanse the head of hair and what we have previously mentioned; after shaving the head of the patient, then make cauterization in the middle of the head and on each temple, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you require more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is strong, then make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and let it be until the most of the heart is burned, and lift your hand; after healing it until it is healed, and use the cautery that is called "olive" which we have mentioned earlier.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Those with epilepsy should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic; and first it is necessary to cleanse the brain of hair and other remedies that we have mentioned in the division when the disease is great and suffering, taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot bear it, make them gargle and chew, purifying the brain often with good meats; then the king's men take hold of his head, and they make .i. cautery according to what we have said before, and .i. cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the illness is strong and painful, make cauteries as I have said for one who has paralysis and softening of the body, upon the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the illness is in an infant, make 1 fine cautery according to this method
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When through the cause of melancholy there are corrupt humours and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with gentle cauteries as we have said for one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if through the cause of melancholy the superfluities are declining towards melancholy, and the body is moist due to the illness, then give them something to drink that will purify the brain according to what is said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After raising the head of the patient, make a well-fitting linen tortilla in the shape of a circle and place it inside the head; cross the linen and hold it tightly from all sides; then apply the liniment and smear old goat's butter on it; gently heat it over fire until the patient can bear its warmth; remove the linen from inside the head and let it cool down; do this for the patient once a week with good care until he recovers.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or, if you wish to cauterize it by making several points all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This cautery method moistens the brain greatly; then place wet cotton in tallow and goose fat on top.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When eye pain comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have described in the division, then begin and give the patient a cleansing drink for the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make him sweat in a bath several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he commands him to look up, and cauterizes the head, and makes two cauteries on the two temples if the dislocation is in both eyes, or one if it is in only one; and stop all veins and arteries beneath the brain, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of bloodletting, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it as well as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you the extraction of arteries and the incision of cauteries; and sometimes cautery or haters are done beneath the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	of the body from weeping
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears in the eyes are old and habitual, and are upon the veins, or beneath the arteries that are on the appearance of the head outside; and one sees that this is from cold phlegmatic superfluities, then he makes the cautery that I said at the beginning of the eye: one cautery in the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or haters beneath the two bones; and if there is a need for more, then he cauterizes bleeding above the eyebrow with a small cautery all around.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	where tears flow from inside them
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three nights of poultices; after that, shave his head, and cauterize him with the middle olive cautery; and make two cauteries called "clavilis" on the two sorces, one just under the hair; and be careful not to hit the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery that is called  "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery, which is called "olive".
de coi ci est li forme:	with which it is formed:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see two warts as long as the sorcerers are; and do not leave your hand except until the third part of the paper is burnt, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that points towards the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes the hair of the eyes is converted to the opposite direction, pointing towards the eye, and one performs cauteries according to two methods: that is, with fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then the patient should put their hand in warm water; next, draw on the paper a shape like the leaf of the myrtle, and have the beginning of the sign among the hairs; then put wet cotton in egg white and wormwood over the eye, then heat the cautery so that it takes the shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, cauterize the shape you drew bit by bit many times until the wound is burnt there; and the sign of the healing of the work is that you see the paper drawn back, and the hairs rise at the tip of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for 3 days, then put wet cotton in lard as long as the scald is healed; then cure with ointment until it is cured.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards the hairs grow, and the paper becomes soft again, then begin the cautery in that same place again, as you did before; and if the hair is broken off, then cauterize it so that the paper rises to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cautery of medicine that burns is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even; then make a shape out of parchment like the leaf of the myrtle; then take equal parts of French soap and vitriol, and grind them well together; and do it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it on the shape you have made like the leaf of the myrtle, and place it over the hairs; and if the disease is in one eye only, then operate on one, and if in both, then on both; and put wet cotton in egg white underneath the eye; and let the patient's hand be in warm water, and place their finger over the medicine, and press it a little and move it each time the patient feels biting from the medicine, because they feel the biting as well as the fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the bite is healed, lift up the eyelid, and examine if you see the papilla raised as it was by the constriction of fire or by an incision; and if so, all is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, apply medicine again to the eyelid where the medicine has not worked, until your actions are even and your eyes are set right; then place wet cotton in tallow until the burnt area is cooled, after which clean the eye of the ointment called "diaphenis" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to take good care of your work with great caution so that it does not break the skin at all.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hair pricks the eye, then restart the medicine on the area that is soft from the paper, properly, as you did before; cure it until it is healed; and this is the form of the murta-leaf:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of humans are diverse in size and shape, and according to this, your constraints should be; and do not deviate from the correct path for those who study this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of a fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you are treating a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not helping, then you should use cautery according to this method.Take a cautery-iron that is medium-sized and flat on one side; heat it until it turns white-hot and place it against the fistula, holding it there until it feels as though it is burning the bone.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to tilt their head towards you; have an assistant hold the patient's head steady in such a way that it does not move or turn away from you. Then wet cotton with egg white or purslane juice and apply it to the eye. Heat the cautery-iron so that it is white-hot, and hold it against the eye in the shape of a tent, or if you prefer, in the shape of a pen-tip, pointed from one end to the other. But whatever shape you use, the cautery should be applied gently so as not to harm the patient's eye.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Afterwards, press on the fistula if it is open to drain it and then dry it off. If it is closed, then open it and draw out any pus. Next, apply the hot cautery-iron gently and hold your hand on the iron at the edge of the eye, taking care not to cause harm; place the cautery-iron in the fat around the eye and corrupt it there.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery just to the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then restart the cautery again, and if you need to, do it once more, and let it be for III days; then put wet cotton in butter on it, and cure it with a desiccative ointment until it is healed, and if XL days pass and it is not healed, then put on an corrosive medicine as much as the bone is exposed; and treat the king according to how he progresses.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that some of the ancients spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Examine the fistula, and open it; then put into the slit a small piece of cotton on which is the medicine:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make the amount of a bean's worth of plaster; and hold your hand or the cotton firmly, and do not move the patient so that the melting plaster does not run into his eye; and one must apply moist cotton to the patient's eye, made from walnut juice or from a mixture: the plaster melts the fistula, and heals it miraculously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula heals through the cautery we have described, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, one must open the vein and draw out the fistula from the body of the vein according to what is appropriate in its own place.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often, cracks occur in the lips that are called "hair," especially in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have described in the sections above, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small scalpel according to this shape:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it quickly in the cracks until it reaches the bottom; after that, treat the site with cerotet until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When the abscess occurs in the root of the throat or the uvula, or the palate, or the roots of the teeth, it creates swelling and rot and becomes a fistula; and you should treat it as we have described in the section on incisions, and if it does not heal: you must then reveal the site and remove the rotten bone according to what you find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it doesn't help, then put the head of the patient in your hand; after heat the cautery which will be described below in such a way that you place a candle on the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside the tooth, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat going to the root of the tooth; after lifting your hand, repeat the cautery according to your desire; then fill the patient's mouth with salted water, and let them gag for an hour and release their phlegm.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way, the tooth that was loose is now firm, the gums softened and restrained, and the corrupted moisture dried up.
de la dolor des dens	from dental pain
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When dental pain comes from coldness, or there is coldness or whiteness, and medical remedies are ineffective, then cauterization in two ways is required: cauterization with butter, and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization with butter: take butter from a cow, and the end in a spoon made of iron or brass; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, moisten it in the butter, and place it on the aching tooth until it cools down; do this repeatedly until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. If you see the moistened cotton and butter cool off, heat up the iron again until the fire reaches the gum of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The fire cauteries: take a piece of iron or bronze, and make it as thick as the fistula, so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient; then heat the cautery, so that the medicine comes out afterwards, and put it on the ulcer and hold your hand until the cautery cools down. Do this often, for the pain will be removed that day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary for the patient to fill his mouth with good butter in preparation for this cautery, and then release it; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery on whichever tooth you want, according to what power you have; and this is the shape of the cane:
des scrophules	of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula is caused by cold dampness and is unresponsive to digestion-inducing medicines, then heat the cautery according to the formula given below, which has two openings for the smoke to exit on the other side; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once, where it is needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, use the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days; then moisten cotton with butter and apply it to the burn until the burn is healed; afterwards, treat the area with ointments and bandages until it is completely healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture prevails over the channels of the lung, and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then the patient should first be purged with solubilizing medicines; then make cautery at the root of the throat, and beware that you do not go up to the throat, and do not burn the heart but just a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then make another cautery at the joint of the neck at the head of the spine, and the cautery is called 'clavicle', of which we have the form before; and treat the area as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	of the tongue
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all diseases of the stomach are from cold moistors, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is old, then make two cauteries on the chest in their usual places; and another cautery in between the breasts; using the cautery called 'clavicle' as described before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see it, make cautery in the point throughout all the cautery which is called 'points' of which the form is as before in the disease of the ears; and may the points go to thirty or more.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After curing the area according to what has been said before, and the cautery is performed three times according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for this reason are cauteries lighter, because you make them .iiij. times.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterward, apply the cautery to his back and side; then lift the heart which is within the breast with your left hand's fingers; and if the joint is dislocated within, heat the cautery that has .ij. nerves of the duck's web where there is a lump:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the head until it penetrates to the bone, and the figure of the cautery will come out with four cauteries; and for this reason there is a cautery made with a cautery which has three points, so that the figures of cauterization are six cauteries; and the nerves follow according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery which has three points:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is adjusted above that one nerve so that there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Afterwards, put the broiled porrells on the cautery; afterwards, let the patient rest, and the limb should not be moved for a long time until he is completely healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, which rarely happens, then perform the cautery on the thick part of the cautery tool, or a lot of cauteries puncturing.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture occur in the stomach to the point of straining his complexion, and he has many catarrhs, and traditional treatment methods don't help, then the patient should be laid on his back, and his legs and arms stretched out.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	After that, make three cauteries, one under the heel of the foot, according to the size of a fingernail, with all the cautery tool, and two cauteries on either side so that the shape of the cauteries is at three angles, and there is enough space between them so that they are not joined together when they bend; and the cauteries should be deep enough that both parts of the heart bleed, and the shape of the cauteries is as follows without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form; and whoever is afraid of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and sign on the stomach in one point according to the quantity that you want to go in; then cauterize it all with the cautery which is called "poins".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the disease that we have described before, until it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver is pained by cold and moisture and strong winds because it has been moved from its natural complexion by excesses, and the disease is treated as we have said with incisions, but does not benefit, then the patient should lie on his back; and three cauteries are marked according to this form, figure and quantity on the liver, avoiding the hypogastric region where the intestines of man are; and there should be the thickness of a thumb between each cautery, and the cauteries should be of moderate length from the body, and do not press your hand too hard against it throughout the cautery; only half the chest should be burned, and the patient should lie straight on his back with his feet elevated; if he cannot, then he should lie on his side with his legs stretched out and his thighs lifted.  This is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you wish, you can cauterize these cauteries with a scalpel, if you are skilled and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn the heart, for you would dry out the whole body; and let it not come to boiling, for the heart is very delicate in that place, and you know this by sight.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know whether it is in the substance of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the substance, the patient does not feel the pain too strongly; but if it is in the membrane, they feel intense pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then when this treatment is applied to the eyes, the patient should be reclined on their back; and then sign with a finger on the spot where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar in shape to a raisin, from which comes the form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize with the cautery until the scrotum is burnt and it reaches the testicle, until all the pustules are dried up; then cure according to the cure of the poultices until he is healed; and no one should use this cautery except those who have studied long in the art of medicine, and by whom these diseases have sometimes been cured.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore he can safely operate, but nevertheless I think it better to leave him alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should make cauteries for pleurisy from the roots of aristolochia, and in this way: take a long, dry root of aristolochia, as thick and long as your finger; moisten it with oil, heat it in the fire, and cauterize .i. cautery between the sternum and collarbone, and .ii. small cauteries a little lower down on the part under the beard; and .ii. cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, inclining slightly backward; and .i. cautery in the armpit, and .i. another over the stomach, and .i. between the .ii. shoulders, and .ii. at the .ii. sides of the foot below the cautery that is between the .ii. shoulders; and do not press your hand hard, but do it gently as when incense-burning.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And some ancient authorities say that someone should use a cautery made of iron like a razor, heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches that abscess; if there is any pain as we have said in the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this operation, there is fear of death for the patient, or a fistula occurs which cannot be healed.Et si li maux ne fuist pas saine, il demourra la fistule et l’ulcere; si convient que tu remettes la fistule et l’ulcere, et fasses ovrier oueque il a le plus grant dolor, car en cestui ovraige a grand dolor.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you are treating the disease of the moon as we have said in the sections on treatment, and it does not help, then there are three ways of cauterizing which are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of these there is a way in which you make three cauteries, or four, by lining up according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the cautery of the liver that we have described before; and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient be careful on his back; and another way of cauterizing is to heat the cautery which has two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift up the armpit where the mouse comes towards the left, and let the elevation by which you raise the armpit be according to the armpit, according to the length of the body, and let the cautery be according to the breadth of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	Afterward, put in the two flaming nerves until the armpit is pierced on the other side; then draw away the cautery, and thus there will be four of them. And if you wish, cauterize all the cautery with three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure when it has healed for a long time, and this is better than the other cures mentioned above.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery is not useful for hydropic people, except in the manner which is called "asclytes.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you cure them according to the ways we have described in divisions, and your cure is not helping, then you should make 4 cauteries around the chest, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one on the buttocks; and the cauteries should be close to the heart's spine.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	Afterward, leave the cautery open to drain pus for a long time, and do not cease treating the patient after the cautery; healing will hasten, and the two intentions will come together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly should be like the key we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is shown there before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of foot swelling
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in someone who is hydropic, and they are full of yellow water, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning.Quant li piez sont enflez, et les cuisses et la nassance del piet, et le mollet, adonques covient que tu cauterizes sus li mollet dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et ta cure ne profite mie, covient que tu retournes a leu et tu cauterizes a l’envers.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not go in too deeply, but close up towards the yellow awl, and make the cautery according to this shape:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	Afterwards, make 2 cauteries on each leg at the base of the toenail; and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other above, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries in place for a long time without curing, until the water comes out; afterwards cure the others that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When there is an issue with digestion due to coldness and moisture, and the retentive and digestive powers in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and it cannot be cured by usual means; and you see the patient suffering greatly and in great distress, then do as follows: make a large cautery on the stomach according to what was said before about the cautery of the stomach; and make four small cauteries around the abdomen with a slender rod for each cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see an abundance of moisture and the patient suffering, then make a cautery on the elbow, and one cautery on each shoulder blade, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the larger one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	on the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are in the anus, one or more, and are old and consist of large cold moist corrupted humors, and they have been treated as described by division, but it has not helped, then make cauterizations: III on the spine of the back, that which is completely outside underneath the anus little by little in a triangle shape, and II cautery marks underneath the buttocks; and if you think that his stomach is cold, and the food does not digest, and one sees swelling in the face, then make I large cautery on the stomach, as it was said before, and I another on the liver, and I another on the spleen, all cauterized with the clavicle; and leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After curing the site until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is called "thelul."
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you scrape the  "thelul," heat up the cautery which resembles a razor, and then place it fully heated on the scraped  "thelul"; keep your hand there so that the cautery comes to the base of the vein, from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of  "thelul," cauterize each one as we have described. After that, cure them with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the scrotum, it will provide more relief.
de plaie mal curee	of an uncured wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will discuss in its proper place, there comes such a disease that it cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is a fistula, and it is discharged and there is pus and corrupt moisture, then you should probe it with a thin rod, taking care to sense how deep the rod goes.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	Then heat the cautery which resembles a razor, and insert it into the fistula according to the amount that the rod entered, and repeat the cautery until the pus and corruption are burned, once or twice or thrice, depending on the quantity needed; and be careful not to burn the nerves that are nearby, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes into the bladder and intestines, then be careful of those sites, and do not apply the cautery too deeply, and think that it is not a bone; afterward cure the site until it is healed, and if the site is swollen and the matter is discharged for a long time, then know that the site is fully healed; and if the matter is not discharged, know that the site is damaged and the bone at the bottom is corrupted; and thus as one of those which we will discuss in their respective sections.
de la maladie des reins	of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When frosty pain comes to the kidneys, and with great windiness, and it does not take the form of a woman, then you must cauterize him on the kidneys on one side and the other with the clavicle cautery that we mentioned earlier. And if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will do more good.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, such that the patient retains urine, then he should be cauterized in the lower part of the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic hair begin, both on the right and left sides, and each cautery should be as long as a thumb; and make one cautery over the back, or two if you need them; and let the cauteries be curved as described before.
de la marris	of the brain
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the brain is cold and moist, and unable to conceive, and the fluids are corrupted and their terms delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: then one should make 3 cauteries around the head, as we have said in the cautery for the bladder, and two cauteries over the back; and let the cauteries be curved, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous humors descend to the socket of the hip joint and displace it due to this, the thigh appears longer than the other when measured together; and if the place of the displacement is found hollow, you should cauterize the malady on the socket of the hip with a .i. cautery resembling a circle, and mark around the socket as it turns, so that the socket is within the circle; and the cautery should be such as that used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not available to you, make .iij large cauteries from the olive oil, and let the cautery be as deep as all the scabs; and cure it until it is healed.Et si li boistes est trovez plis a l’un costé que a l’autre, covient que tu le cure de la partie qui est plus haute, et si le cure tant qu’il soit sanz dolor; et se il a grant dolor, si covient que tu le cure par petit pons, tant que li dolors s’esvaigent.
de la dolor de la hainche	And if the socket is found more on one side than the other, you should cure it from the part that is higher, and cure it until there is no pain; and if there is great pain, then you must cure it by little bridge, until the pains subside.Et se il a grant dolor, si covient que tu le cure par petit pons, tant que li dolors s’esvaigent.
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip socket, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the disease is cured of that which we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the disease of the gross humors with fetid pills, or other good-smelling pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After him, do cautery; and the way of cautery is according to two ways: that is to say together with burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is according to many ways, of which one is such: that you cauterize on the hip bone three triangular cauteries according to this shape, and make it with good depth and wide, and there should be between each cautery a space the thickness of a thumb, and the cauteries are olive-shaped; sometimes they do cautery in the middle on the head of the hip, because of which there are four according to this shape:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you wish, let him be cauterized with the circular cautery that we mentioned earlier in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circles contain all of the hip, and all of the thickness of the heart is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And that is the way they do it in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it extends to the thigh and leg, they do two cauteries where the patient says the pain holds, and four cauteries above the ankle three fingers, on the left side a little; and let the cauteries be knife-shaped, and burn the thickness of the skin; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to one or both feet, they cauterize where they feel the pain at three or four points with what is called the «point» cautery.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if necessary, do more; and if he feels the pain below the knee towards the thigh, use a cutaneous or circular cautery, and take great care with all your cauteries that you do not leave the cautery on so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient greater harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	I myself have seen many who had cautery applied to the ankle, and they left it until the leg was completely swollen, and the foot too, and it became pierced and corrupted throughout the foot.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a stomach complaint from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two places together, apply cautery in one and the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise men said about cautery for the hip, of which this is the method, make an iron rod and let it be at the head as thick as a little finger, or a little less, and let it be between the teeth, and let there be a space between them of the quantity of the thickness of a thumb joint; and let the teeth be on both sides, and let them also be like knots, and have a good handle made of iron; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it should be heated until it is bright red and smoking, and then applied to the hip joint of the affected side, and turned to the healthy side; and the cautery iron should be applied once for each cautery, and then left for three days. And then use an ointment of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after that, treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use this cautery sparingly due to fear of its appearance, and although we see few who use it, it is one of the good cauteries which those who can endure it should employ wherever they need it.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cautery of medicine burns when you make the instrument to interlock in such a way that the edge of the door descends, and it is made of brass or iron with one side long, and it has two holes at the top, and there is between each the thickness of a thumb; and they are open on the bottom and top, and they join together according to this form.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	Afterward, place the box of the hip on the patient lying on his sound side, and press your hand firmly on the box of the hip; afterward pour between the two circles of the hot vinegar which has been heated over the fire for a moment, and let the patient endure the heat and burning of it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For there will be a burning as from fire; and when the burning is passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip gently, and leave it thus for three days, and apply butter until that which is black from the scald is removed; and let it be for three days until pus comes out in place of it; and this would be the last aid after the treatment with ointments as far as he is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, you shall make the instrument that colors according to how you have done in the hip similarly; and that is the manner of the hot dye, and I have written it in the treatise on the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, as much of each, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	in which there is a small hole so that the point of a needle can enter; and place on top of that pot another pot well-sealed, and put on top of the alkali and chalk the dye, and let it stand until it has dissolved and settled in the sealed pot, then take all of that dye and pour it over the alkali and chalk as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then there will be much pain and it is relieved by various remedies in medicine and by cauterizing other parts for it does the same harm as fire, and also by other remedies with which one cauterizes the hip well, such as theriac, honey, anardana fruit, and chalk mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells of a remedy by which a man was cured of hip and sciatic pain, and he praised it highly, saying that nothing else was done to him, and that he was healed at once when this remedy was applied, and that afterward he took a bath as instructed below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he describes how you should take green and dry litharge, and grind it well with a little grease, and apply it to the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is located, and cover it; let it remain for three hours until the patient no longer feels any burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then let him enter the bath until his body is slightly warmed, and let him enter the bed, and the pain will all leave and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such remedies after evacuating the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioiscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's dung, it helps a lot; and the cautery must be done in this way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take lamb's wool and grease it with old oil, and place it in the hollow between the big toe and the one next to it, which is called the 'foscile'.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After that, take dry goat's dung and heat it in the fire until it becomes charcoal, and place it on the wool, and let it stay until it is cold; and do this again, and keep doing this until you feel that it has reached the hip and that the pain has stopped; and this type of cautery is called the 'cautery of goat's dung'.
de la dolor dou dos	of back pain
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When back pain comes from sitting or impact, or from excessive evacuation, or from similar cold matter spreading, none of these indications warrant cautery except in the case that arises from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary, after the patient has been bled of foul pills or similar, to apply an ointment over the back where the pain is, in three parallel lines, and in each line .v. cauteries, or more according to the strength and amount that the patient can endure; and the cautery should be performed using the cautery called «point», and if you see fit, perform .iij. cauteries or .iiij. using the medium-sized cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a stiff neck when they wake up, and fear; and you will find in the last spine in the back and in us the appearance which comes above the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and cure it, then cauterize it with a cautery of celandine according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery purples every part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery two or three lines apart, and have the points close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	Afterwards, heal the site until it is healthy according to what we have said, and be careful not to administer cautery in a swelling that is on a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain is caused by moistors that are spread throughout the body's limbs, and when it comes in the feet, which they properly call "podagra", and when it is from a cold cause and cannot be healed with medicine, then it is cured through cauterization in this way: make the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-colored according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is a need to prick the sole of the foot, then do cauterization all over with the cautery that is called «point».
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and that happens many times, then do cauterization on each knee with three or four cauteries of each part, all over with the olive-shaped cautery; and if you need more, then do more, but do not hold your hand firmly for more than as long as the thickness of the heart is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and back, administer the cautery we mentioned in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make a point around the wrist two lines; and if there remains no pain in the fingers, make points on each joint and on the palm of the hand; and if the pains come to the elbow or shoulder, cauterize each part, and practice good medicine on the patient and take remedies.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you practice good medicine and purge the phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rot of the sinus
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When a hernia occurs in the groin and the testicles descend into the scrotum, it is newly formed. So when you see it being cured, he should not eat that day. He should use things that loosen the belly so that the feces will exit his abdomen; then have him sit on his back between your hands and command him to hold his breath until the hernia is repaired, and then pull it back into your hands. Sign with your finger underneath the hernia over the bone of the groin, and throughout a sign that resembles half a circle on top of the body; then heat up the cautery which has this shape:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as it is white and bleeding.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bones to their place; and have the patient hold his hand so that it does not return; and work well on the thighs of the patient, and put a pillow under him, and a servant under the thighs, and another under the foot which holds up the hands; then put the cautery on the wound all over your hand, and hold it straight and keep doing this until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, do it again until you reach the bone; and be careful that the wound does not bleed when you do the cautery so that you do not burn him, and so that the patient does not die from it, or any other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And the cautery for children should be subtle according to the size of their ears, and for large people it should be as large according to their size; after III days, dress the site of the cautery with butter until the scorch is removed; then dress it with other ointments until it heals, and let the patient lie on his back for XL days so that the wound is well closed; and one must let their hair grow long enough so that it covers their neck when they bend down to enter a room.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after XL days, when he wants to stand up, if a well-made bandage is provided for him, and he wears it for another XL days, and keeps good rest, eats little and takes care not to drink or eat too much, and doesn't shout too loudly; then if he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say after this about the treatment of cutting on his shoulder.
de la routure dou ventre	of abdominal hernia
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ulcers come in other intestines and are known, and you see that they are not growing anymore, then make the cautery according to its quantity, and burn the third of the skin; afterwards treat it according to what we have said. And some of the ancients say that one should cauterize with a three-angled cautery according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the site with ink and make a line along the width above the ulcer, and another across, and hold your hand firmly on it throughout the cautery process.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and milder.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in a limb, whether from falling or injury, and the pain lasts a long time, and medical treatment does not help, then it should be cauterized with the cautery called "pinpoint," and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb, its smallness, weakness, and location of twist and pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If it is healed from the first cautery, that is good; if not, do another cautery on top of it, for it is the custom that it should move in the member that is nearest to it, therefore you should do the cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	of mixing
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	Sometimes hemorrhoids are cured by cautery with great difficulty, and especially those illnesses that come from the putrefaction of blood and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	When you see it cauterized, take care if the illness is in its beginning, and if it is healed according to what we have said in the division, and it does not become worse or persist, and you doubt that the corruption may spread throughout the illness, then do 5 cauteries on the head: one in the middle of the head, and another towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and 2 on the two horns, and one behind on the nape of the neck; and let your hand stay so that the cautery reaches the bone, and as long as the scorches come out so that the vapors of the gross humors can issue out; and cauterize on the mouse according to how it is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the disease is scattered everywhere; and it is clearly losing strength, then you should cauterize it with these cauteries that we have mentioned: one cautery on the head, two cauteries on the spine of the neck, six cauteries on the spine of the back, one large cautery on the groin, and another smaller one, two cauteries on the shoulders; two cauteries on the ears, two cauteries on the tendons of the feet, one cautery on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and be careful of the nerves that are on the back of the heel so that you do not burn them; and sometimes a cautery is placed on the bone of the wrist, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more you do of cautery, the more it helps him, and moves him to profit; and know that the sick person does not feel pain from cauterization as a healthy person feels it, because the body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	Afterwards, treat the place with wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes to a member and is treated with remedies, oils, and poultices, but it is not healed, then do cauteries on the member according to the size of the member; and let the cautery be a little inside the thickness of the skin; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes cautery is performed on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that paralyzes the limb, and thus the swelling is removed; and yet no one should attempt this unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves that move the body.
de albaras	of poplars
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" appears, and medicine does not help, then cauterize it with a moderately deep cautery according to the thickness of the wound until the whiteness is removed and the color changed; then treat it with an ointment made of equal parts wheat flour and lentil flour, rose oil, and plantain leaves, as well as colon blood and almond blood. Mix everything together and apply it, covering it with a cloth and exposing it to air until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of ulcers by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a ulcer first appears, and you want to stop it, then cauterize it with a round cautery, all around the edge of the ulcer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And yet the wise say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the ulcer; and yet I do not think this is good, for I fear it will be burned and corrupted, and indeed I have seen this happen more than once; and a more certain thing is to cauterize around it, with the round cautery which we have described earlier.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot heal
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it is slow to die, either due to the excess fluid it produces or because of the age of the disease when it becomes decrepit (that is, very old), and there is little blood, or because of the season; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize it all over with many small cauteries by piercing; after that leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing all the way through, then heat the cautery with which it is formed:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of that disease called  "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the skin, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels them drawing away from his body in such a way that the course of the pus is relieved.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Afterwards, treat it until it is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cure through iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	There is another kind of disease called   "corrodens", which is nothing other than a corrosion of a limb, for it corrodes the limbs just as fire scorches dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a place that can withstand fire cautery, then heat the cautery iron small and large, according to what is appropriate for the location of the disease; after cauterizing it all over, until you have removed all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that all that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for 3 days, and apply soft bandages with oil on the cauterized areas until the burns from the fire are healed, and all the corruption is removed.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After that, treat the sores caused by chafing.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after 3 days that the sores are not healing, then repeat the cautery on what remains of the corrupted areas.Et puis met sus char broiet avec oile de lin et oile d’amendons a la fin que char saine, et apres le lave avec oile d’amendons et vin blanc selonc ce qu’il covient, et met sus oignemen engendre char.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this madness has sometimes been cured by medicine instead of fire cautery; but nonetheless, fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already described the cure for mad dog disease in the section on treatment: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of sores that come on the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that through defect a disease called 'ulcer' according to our understanding arises in the feet, and is a large faulty growth that blisters the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this disease is according to two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is, fire cautery and hot water cautery.Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is done by heating the cautery iron as hot as a bee-sting, and made of good iron to the size that it can press the claw from all sides, and with subtle edges; then apply it hot to the claw, and turn your hand all around the claw until it reaches the bottom of the claw; then leave it thus for 3 days until it starts to produce pus; then make a poultice of wild mallows crushed with salt, and leave the poultice on overnight, and the claw will drop off and be uprooted by its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the area with a healing ointment until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	If they are turned inward toward the body, and often occur in hands and feet, you should treat them with hot water cautery in this manner: take a brass or iron needle, or a pen knife, and place it on the nail and the nailbed, that is, on warts; then put the needle on so that it pierces all around the wart, then pour a little hot water on it, hold your hand steady, and rotate your hand so that the edge of the needle comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water path deep to the root; let the patient endure the burning of the hot water for an hour or so; then leave it as is, and it will be pulled out at its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another, until you extract all those who are in the body, then heal them with ointments that generate pus.
li cure dou trembler	trembling cure
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone is shaking from coldness in their nerves, or from quartan fever or other [ailments], one should make four or five cauterizations on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each vertebrae; and one cauterization on the penis, and one on the stomach with an olive-shaped cautery; thus will it stop the shaking, and hasten the healing from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of stinking pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes they appear as suppurating sores or stinking pustules on the body, which come from putrid corrupt matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	When they first appear, a cautery should be made on each head of the pustule: with a thin cautery of myrtle wood, whose tip is taken to the fire, or with the long root of aristolochia, or with a lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, in this way, and they cannot grow from there anymore, but the superfluity from which they come is disrupted, and they are healed; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.Quant il appert une pustule en quelque leu qu’il soit, ou une charpule, ou une sone, ou une bosse, ou une escare, si covient que on la cure a l’huile d’olifre, ou a l’olio de mirte, ou a l’olio de la rose, et a l’olio du murex, ou a l’olio de la camomille, ou a l’olio de la violette.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great bloodletting from the artery which is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and in similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to stanch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet when this happens to someone, you should quickly put your index finger over the wound of the vein, and press it hard until the blood is quietened beneath your finger, and no drop comes out; then take several olive-wood cauteries, both large and small as the wound and the location where the artery is running, and apply the cautery to that vein where you are holding your finger, and hold the cautery there until the bleeding is staunched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if the blood spurts out when you lift your finger from the wound and the cauteries are extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries which are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease doing this one after the other until the bleeding is staunched; and be careful that you do not harm the nerve which is nearby, and that no other evil comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be staunched well by itself when the artery is large, except by one of four methods that we have described: by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong ligature, or by medicines put on which have power to stanch blood; and let it be bound and compressed skillfully.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers a tight bandage or places hot objects on it, or similar things, will not benefit much if at all.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if it happens to someone and there is no doctor or medicine available, then one should put their index finger on the wound as we have said, and press hard until it feels tight on the wound; and do not move it, but moisten it with cold water often so that it becomes very cold until the blood is congealed and swollen and tight; and make inquiries beforehand about what cauteries and medicines are needed.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of wound treatments
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases that require cautery by fire or burning medicine, and the oedemas and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; and I included that chapter from head to foot, and I will go through this chapter in the same way so that one may more easily find what they are looking for.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus as I begin this, it is fitting, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and therefore greater care is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to embark on folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many types of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	if they come from such who are so overcome by their illness that they would easily die from the force of their disease, and from the greatness of their wickedness; and one must fear these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And there are those who give you their consent and say, "wait, I am cured"; and the disease is stubborn.Et il doit aler en telz lieuz qu’il ne sache, et ne doit on pas le suer por qu’il soit pris; car mult est la dolour qui il ot, et mult li faut de repos et de calm.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	You should not consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put more pride in your honor than in your desire, and do not open foolishly but wisely from what you are certain of, and from what you can get possession and gain; and use prophecy and indication in the cure of your illnesses, for salvation is turned to it. And that will help you to this good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have ordered this chapter in discussing by chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cauteries, which I have discussed from the head to the feet, so that you may more easily find what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Do you know that this disease comes very often to children when they are born, and when the baby's head is squeezed too tightly; and sometimes it comes from a relaxed cause that one does not know about.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	I have never seen this disease in adults, and in all cases I have witnessed, death has resulted; therefore, it seems best to me not to treat it in this manner.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	I saw a child whose head was filled with water, and his head swelled every day until he could no longer bear it; and the moisture accumulated under the bone above the brain, between the heart and the bone. If the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, then you should split the head open widely in the middle, making an incision as long as two fingers, so that the moisture flows out. See the figure of the spatumile:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the pocket of moisture is deeper and the abscesses are larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, as shown in this figure:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the edges of the head opening up in each part, and water squirts out when you press it with your hand from the inside, and it does not close back up again, then you must split open the head in four places in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, draw out all the moisture forcibly.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Afterward, he tightens the splits with bandages and powders, and puts in wine and oil, and leaves it thus for five days; then loosen it, and cure the wound by tenting and ointments, and let the head be extracted equally, and give the patient dry food from a pocket of moisture until the limb is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is to examine where the aperture of the abscess is located, and the gathering of the pus; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut therefore where the abscess opens and the pus gathers, and make the incision according to what you can do; but be careful not to cut an artery, for then there will flow a stream of blood, and the patient will die from bleeding and evacuating moisture.
de reume	from gout
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to someone that they have a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or feet, and the disease is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the last resort is cauterization with which one will cut the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	When you see them covered, have the patient lean back; then rub the area around his neck with a rough cloth until the veins appear; then tighten the cloth around his neck all the way up to the cloth; then look where the vein beats, and the places on either side after the ears, and they are depressed; then sign the places in, then cover both with a spatulum that is pointed at both ends, so that the ligature vein comes just to the bone, and this should be by the large part of the neck.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it, insert the spatula under the artery and cut it from above, cutting also about 2 inches across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, let the blood flow upward continuously.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the vein does not appear to the touch, measure the amount of space for three fingers, then sign in and cut just to the bone; and what is needed of blood to be let out is six parts, and by chance a little more or less, depending on what the patient can endure, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone not a point of a syringe, then cover so that abscesses do not come, then stretch the wound and ligate, and dress with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of emetics
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient vomiting comes, and a sharp catarrh, due to moisture in the eyes, and heat in the temples, and old madness, and similar things, and he is treated by various methods of medicine but none of it helps him, then we should open the arteries in the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extraction is that the patient pulls back the hair on his temples, and feels the artery in the temple, which opens clearly by its pulsation, and is little relaxed towards some people who are too cold; and if it is relaxed, the patient stretches his neck with some cloth, then rubs the area with some rough cloth, and sprinkles the area with warm water until the artery appears distinctly; then take the spatulum, of which there is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	then lightly scorch the skin until you reach the artery, then pull it upward with tweezers and carefully separate it from the surrounding tissues on both sides; and if the artery is delicate, return it to the crook of the fingernail, then cover that part according to the amount of the two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not covered, the blood will not stop bleeding everywhere.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw the blood out for a quarter of an hour to three hours; and if the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk so that pus does not come before the wound heals, and let the blood flow gently; then cut off the excess between the two ligatures in the same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with an iron cautery to the bone until the shoulder is cut through; and this is the best treatment if the patient does not have a fever and is of a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery is helpful in drying out moisture; for this reason, it is even more useful for moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Or it is fitting for the extraction of arteries that one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, one should apply dry medicines that cause a blister to form, and also use bandages, until it is healed; and if without cutting into the artery as much as you work at it, then hasten to cover it with a cautery, or employ vitriol and hold it in your hand so that the blood is scorched; and if you do not have that at hand, then put vinegar on the wound so that the blood congeals, and moisten the wound with cold water so that the blood ceases, and bind it as it should be; and what is best and gentlest for the extraction of an artery is to cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery of two parts, but the cutter must be quite thick in order to retain its heat for longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too thin, it holds its heat less well.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And the space between the two knives should be a finger wide, and when you have cut into both sides and placed the hot iron upon it until it reaches the bone, and closed the vein in two places; and the two heads should be kept apart because they are not joined by this cautery from top to bottom; and this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears flow from the veins that are on the top of the head, and medicine does not help, and you see the face of the patient turn red, and there is trembling as if from fear; and when the eyes are sunken and moist so that the eyelids have fallen, and the eyelids are scorched and burnt by the tears, then this treatment is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called it in old French 'cure contuse', and you should make three incisions on the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the incisions be as long as two fingers right in the middle of the forehead, going downward toward the nose, and the other two at the sides above the eyebrows, and be careful not to cut the arteries that are on either side above the eyebrows; and keep your hand away from the jawbone, and let each wound be the length of three fingers across the joints; and have ready a piece of sponge and a lot of cloth to soak up the blood, then insert the spatulum evenly on both sides where there is the deformity:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is by the temple all the way to the second incision; and scorch all the skin between the two incisions up to the bone, then do the same from the middle incision all the way to the other second one, and then pull out this spathumile.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Then pour into the first incision the instrument that is called "cultellare," which is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other, and it is shaped like this:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And cut along the ribs towards the chest, and slice under the bone, and pierce through until you reach the middle fracture.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And tie off all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous down to what opens up from the chest, and then make another cut in the middle fracture down to the other side; then draw out the blood equally, and express the site of the bloodletting; then place a tent made of old cotton in each fracture, and place dampened cloths in wine and oil and garlic on top, and guard against any abscesses forming there; after three days loosen the ligature, and administer copious quantities of warm water, then treat the wound with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other remedies used to heal wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	from the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When someone has a sudden catarrh, and you see the eyes are red and small, and the vision is weakened, and the eyelids burnt, and the hair falls out, and in the head there is pain, and the patient sneezes; then know from these symptoms that this matter and these catarrhs do not come from anywhere but from many veins, and the medicine that cures it is here.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you should command the patient to recline on his back, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another from the large pore.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And start the incision from the left temple to the right, and cut to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerve temples that move to eat; and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then open between the two lips of the incision and insert old cotton, and tent with linen; then bind with moistened cloths in wine and oil, and beware of hot abscesses; when it is removed, you should rub the bone until new flesh begins to grow, then treat it with healing things that cause inflammation.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this way: take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of colophony, and make a poultice out of it; administer it to wounds to promote the growth of new flesh everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the treatment of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears are one of four things: grains, animals, rocks, or similar objects such as iron; seeds such as peas, beans, and lentils; and fluids such as water, garlic, and similar substances.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it falls into the ear stone or any other kind of thing that does not adhere to the ear, nor grow in the ear, then put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see a stone, then distil some violet oil or oil of sweet almonds, and then administer extraction; and cause him to sneeze by means of spices, and stop the nostrils when sneezing comes, and put pieces of linen or wool around the ear; and have the ear uppermost.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times it comes out through this treatment; and if it does not come out, then administer extraction with thin pincers, in accordance with its shape.
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out with the tweezers, all the better; if not, then perform extraction with a small, thin hook made of fine wire; and if it still does not come out, make an iron hook and insert its tip firmly into the ear canal, then pack the space around the hook with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the hook. Then pull it out forcefully, for often it comes out in this way as we have said; but if it does not come out like this, take some bird glue and attach to it a tool made for this purpose, and place some cotton wool around it. Then press the glue onto the object, whether it is a stone or something else, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not come out with all the things we have mentioned, then you must split the ear so that pus and heat may come out, and there will be spasms; and the manner of splitting is to first make the patient lie down on his back, and draw blood from the head according to its strength, then hold the patient between your hands and turn their ear upwards, and make a small cut at the base of the ear where the fat hangs, so that the cut is shaped like a crescent moon and reaches the object. Then remove it with your fingers, and suck on it vigourously with your mouth until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grains that are inside and it swells, then administer an enema; and if it cannot exit, then administer a suppository with a thin rod according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision on that spot.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think the grains are moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many cuts; then extract it with thin pincers and a sucking instrument, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.Et si les pinceures ne peuvent aligerement li prendre, s’il est gros, et li membres sont grans, qu’on li fasse incision sus li members, si que li piere vienne fuer; car li piere non doit demorer en li corps.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case of water coming out of the ear, the patient should use a nostrum of the first ingredients, and plug the ear with cotton wool.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And he should lie on that same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it runs out through the hole, that is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, then take many stones according to the size of your finger and heat them gently, and insert one into the ear, and put another stone on top of it; and do not stop doing this with one stone after another until all the water comes out, and thus it will all come out; and if you see that there is an abscess, then take a piece of wood, and stick it in the ear, and heat the other end in the fire until the most painful part is burnt; then do the same again with another piece of wood until all the water comes out, as we have said about the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of a foreign object, if it is a small body such as a louse or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large body that can be felt, administer an enema with tweezers; and this is the easiest way to remove what is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section on distillations, and the treatment is not effective, then you should examine the ear in the sunlight. If there are any worms, pull them out with fine tweezers; if there are none, take a cane, and where the shadow falls is where the worm will be.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it is narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And insert the smallest end of the needle into the ear according to the amount of pain from the ailment, then gently suck throughout the vein; do this repeatedly until all the pus comes out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not come out, then stop up the vein with cotton as I have said for the stone; and if they do not emerge as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have experimented with for treating worms, and you will find them in the treatise on distillation; and if distil your oils and medicines into the ear through all this instrument, of which here is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it should be made of silver or brass with small holes below and openings above for distillation; and to press the distillation into the instrument, use a well-crafted brass instrument for this purpose. Take a razor and wrap cotton around the end; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever else you want from your medicines, into the cane, and let the cane be in the ear. Then fill the razor with cotton all around, and press your hand gently so that the oil is distilled into the ear; and the patient will feel it inside, and the distillation should be slightly warmed over fire so that it is not too cold when distilled into the ear, for the medicine would not be as effective then.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the treatment of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without an opening in their ears; and this same thing happens to adults through the plugging of a wound or of pus within the ear, and sometimes these plugs come out of the ear, so one cannot see them; and sometimes there is only a little plug, and one can see it clearly.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, when it comes out of the ear and one cannot see it, it is a matter of concern in various situations, and in such cases, one should put the affected ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the membrane exposed, then treat it according to its shape:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And if it is sharp and pointed in front and behind, all plain, so that it does not pierce the ear; if the membrane is of pus or from the body of the ear, then hold it with fine tweezers and gently scrape it, until all the pus is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the abscesses are deeply embedded in the ear, then take a very thin razor and gently heat it over the fire, then apply it to the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the pain of which the patient feels great grief when heard, pierce gently, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then insert a plug into the ear according to the width of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this for several days until the wound is closed, or take a plug and moisten it in rosewater, and sprinkle powdered vitriol on it; and if you see swelling in the ear, you should remove the plug and replace it with another moistened with an ointment made of olive oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then clean the wound until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if there is bleeding, take a sponge and dip it in cold water, and apply it to the ear, and use other remedies that stop the bleeding which come from the distilling of fluids.
de la char des papieres	of paper charcoal
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This ointment comes from papers when they are moist and dry; you should then extend them with tweezers and pincers, and the tip of a spatula from its roots; then place powdered vitriol on the spot.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if there is no hair in it, then cauterize it with a fine lenticular cautery, and the cautery after the incision is done; and many times they return, until nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of hail
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times they come out of the ears, things that look like gravel in shape and hardness, and because of this, this disease is called "hail", and it is a gathering of thick moisture on top and bottom; the treatment is such: if the hail becomes quiet on both sides, and it is easy to know, then open it widely, then peel each part gently with tweezers, then cut it out.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	if you cannot cut it out without piercing the skin a little, then do not hurt the patient; and if the split is large, then sew it up, and treat it until it heals; and if it is small, then do not force it, for the ointments will restore it right away.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the stone is descending within the ear towards the upper part, then invert the paper, and press it with pincers; and if the paper is removed by incision, that is not harmful; and when the stone is crushed, then wash out the ear with salted water, and treat the passage where the pus flows until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that is encrusted in webs of paper above, and this happens most to children with none to adults, and it is very painful to them, and they get the catharsis in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears hasten to themselves; and because of this, they lie on their faces, and sleep on top of it, and their papers are underneath their eyelids moist that the inflammation and appearance have covered with exinach which appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the area with your fingers and feel the exinch between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of the treatment is that the patient puts his head on the operator's lap; and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains exirnach from each part, and then put it over him; and press with your fingers on both sides so that the exirnach gathers inside the circle. Then cut through the moist skin with a spatula, making an incision no larger than the wound made for vein opening; and in various cases, the exirnach comes out of the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Remove then with your hands a piece of cloth between them to the rear, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out; and be careful not to press on the fissure so that you do not go all the way to the sphincter muscle up to the eye, lest you injure it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the hernia appears at the beginning of the fissure, press the fissure gently until it opens; then pull it as we have said, and moisten with water and cloth, and place on the site, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if it happens to such people who grind their teeth and put something on top to corrupt that moisture which has remained.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the cure until he is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes to the area, hot, then treat it with soothing poultices until it is healed.And if an abscess comes to the area, hot, then treat it with soothing poultices until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	And if it is dislocated, then you must reset it and return it to its place; for the head of the shoulder cannot remain in its place as we have said.of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow from paper, different from nature, and are ingrown, they harm themselves and cause various diseases, such as tears, softening of the paper, and albugine, leading to the destruction of the eyes. The cure follows four methods: through cautery with fire, or with a medicine water according to what is described before the chapter on cautery; it can also be done through incision and suturing or with caustic, according to what I will describe.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You should place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the eyelid of the affected eye towards your left hand; if it turns easily, that is good; if not, insert a needle into the edge of the eyelid, where the hairs are growing out of place, and thread  a single thread through the eyelid, going over the edge of the paper, and draw the thread all the way to the top of the eyelid. Then, in the part below the eyelid, below the misaligned hairs, cut into the skin with a spatulum, starting from the large tear duct up to the small one. Remove the thread, and place a small tent made of cotton and fabric beneath the eyelid, then draw a figure-eight shape on top of the eyelid, like a myrtle leaf, and adjust the shape according to how much you want to lift the divided eyelid.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if it is for a woman who needs it, apply a large quantity of the paper according to how soft the paper is; then cut into the spatumile along the two lines you have marked, and start from the larger wound down to the smaller; let one of the slits be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a hair root, then insert the needle at one of the two corners of the heart, then scrape it all off; then sew the two lips together with a thread of fine wool through an eye needle, and wipe away the blood, and tie off the excess threads above the two eyebrows with any sticky substance you wish to use; if not, don't worry about it, just leave the stitches in for three or four days; then treat the wound without stitches using dry and constricting substances, because the paper heals up at the edge of the wound and closes it, but the stitches are painful (as the ancients say), and this is a job without fear; there is also another way: you mark the paper in the shape of a myrtle leaf, as we have described, with three pointed ends according to the shape shown here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then copy what is above, with small letters evenly according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	If you cannot hold the tongs and the wound is not even, take a needle and thread, and sew it up according to its shape; then take another thread through the large eyebrow, and the second thread through the small one, and bring the threads together evenly between your fingers; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin over which you have sewn, as we have described, then bring the two lips of the wound together by sewing, and heal it; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar soothing ointments; and sometimes the hairs on the paper are converted: so you should use what we have said about the incision; but the sewing in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of warts is as follows: convert the paper and place it inside according to what I have said; then make two warts by art, and two thin threads as long as the width of the spathamile; then cut two heads from two parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly over what is above the wart, and pull the two warts out from their roots; and let them be thus for some days, and the skin that was pulled will die and harden and fall off as it becomes dry.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is slow, and the scabs are strong, then heal it; and when the wound is sewn up, and the paper is raised, and the hairs no longer grow; and this is the shape of the two chains that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	the tools are such that you pierce with a thin needle and thread into the skin, and tie the two heads together subtly, and let the length of the thread be about a palm; then prepare in the case a second thin silk thread, and tie the heads of the threads; then place the patient's head in your hand; and let it be in the sun so that the treatment is revealed, for it is a subtle and small treatment, then pierce the needle all the way into the skin along with the natural hair until you draw it up through the paper, and then draw out the hair to just inside the case, and tie in the case that hair, whether there is one or two or three or more; then withdraw your hand so that the hairs are drawn taut against the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the wound is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then you shall treat the wound underneath to the full extent that you have ordered, until the wound comes out from the opening above and you see it with your eye; then you shall treat the wound and the thread, and close the eye and let it be closed for 1 or 2 days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh grows over it; and if the hair is short, accompany one long hair from the horse's tail, and let it grow with that one, until it is elongated, and then release it.
de la porriture de l’oil	from the eye's pustule
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease called "alacrity" or warts comes in the eye, there are two ways of getting it: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or cutting, or cauterization, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way to treat it is to split that growth, and loosen its lips, and put in tenters of linen, and keep it until it is healed; and you must not use in its treatment anything that dries and restricts.Et quant tu veis li sanger a l’estincion, si covient que tu le fasses tant que tu ne vois mie de sanger; et si il est paine a sanger, si covient que tu failles la soudure tant qu’il soit sanee, et la metes en une fiesche; et li tentes des lin metes les sus l’estincion.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the illness will return worse than before; but work with softening things, such as fenugreek; and rosewater or altée and flaxseed are cooked, and diaquilon ointments melted in one of the oils, and wrap it in a tent, and cure it thus.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the goal of your treatment is that you must be careful that it does not fuse according to the form it was before; and these works that we have said are not remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to the form it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the meat that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This illness that is underneath, which is truly called "axacrati", has natural and accidental causes.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accidental causes come from wounds and incisions and cautery and similar things; and the way to work on this is that you take a needle, with which there is double thread, and pierce it into the flesh, and make it pass through from the left eyebrow so that the thread comes out between the two eyes; then the flesh is pulled up over the needle, and the end of the thread is tied loosely, and the tent is spread wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper returns as it should be, that is good; but if not, take a razor and place it in the slit, and turn the paper over, and cut two slits on either side inside the paper; and the ends of these two slits should be at the two corners of the incision which you have made, and make an angle so that when they are joined together, the shape is like the shape of a letter which has the name "I griesche"; then remove this skin, according to the amount that it has stretched under the paper, from what follows the paper; then join together the two separated parts, and sew them with a thread of wool; then treat it with what we have said about softening medicines, and bandages, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a fissure or a wound or cautery, then you must make a plain slit underneath the hairs of the scrotum, and according to what is stated above; then separate between the two lips of a tent, as I have said; and one should perform the operation according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise master prepares an instrument with all his power so that he makes the figure return to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what he needs in terms of treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	suddenly from the scrotum
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suddenness occurs in many men in such a way that the scrotum above is suddenly cut off from the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must therefore push the point of a razor underneath the scrotum and lift it upwards; and press it with tweezers, until you grasp what is open in the spurge plant, which is neither too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient cannot bear the spurge plant too sharply cutting the eye; and make your incision, by which you scrape away this union, lightly, so that the scrotum returns according to its natural form; and all of this union is healed, and they sometimes produce a sore in the eye, and moisten it with soft wool; then place a tent of linen between the scrotum and the eye, and place moistened wool on top of the eye; and after the third day, use the poultice and the soothing things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	You should know that there are two types of nail: one is nervous and resembles a hard cyst; the other is not nervous but looks like congealed white moisture, which, when touched with iron and pinched with tweezers, cannot be removed; both kinds originate at the outer corner of the eye, grow little by little, and eventually cover the entire field of vision, along with the light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the technique of the incision is that the patient should place their head towards you, then open their eyes; and hold the paper in your hand, then grip the nail with small tweezers, and stretch it out; then take a needle, thread a horsehair, or cow hair, or ox hair through it, double over the tip of the needle a little, and insert it into the nail, and tie the nail with a thread and stretch it out, then cut away all along the side of the nail where the eyelid follows the eyelash, up to the root of the eyebrow, with the scissors very carefully and gently, leaving the natural skin of the eyelid so that the incision does not affect the tear ducts; sometimes only the edge of the nail is stretched out and tied with a thread, as we have said; then cut it away all along the eyelid where the eyelash grows up to the root of the eyebrow.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful that the scissors do not touch and tear the fleshy membrane, or pierce the eyelid; after the incision, put a little powdered chalk in the eye, and place a collar of lint around it, and leave it until the next day; then clean the eye as needed until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nerved, and you cannot push the needle in, and the hooks cannot enter it, many times this kind of nail is cured by medicines; and they are born like I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, then work the eye of the malady, and take the spatule gently, poke little by little according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And lift the nail gently, and if you see that it is not decreasing and the pus is pushing out, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litharge and red copper, and seal the eye until the next day; then begin the other work according to this same method, until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then begin the work again as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the eyelid harms the eye greatly, then suspend it with a hook and cut away a part and not all, so that no body of tears comes to it; then distill into the eye red collar made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows over the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	In some people's eyes, red skin sometimes grows, covering the pupil and resting above the paper, and it looks like a rose of baal; the work is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then you open his eyes, and cut away all the skin to small nails suitable for this purpose, and support them with force; then cut away the first skin, and go all around the razor until the end, and be careful not to hurt the eye in the operation; and let the incision be as we have said in the incision of the nail, and with small forces from which one removes the sebaceous matter, just as the form after this chapter demonstrates; and when the incision is complete and all the skin is removed, then apply the egg-white eye oil which you distill collyrium red and similar corrosive medicines, and put cotton wool on the eye with egg white, so that it is secured from hot abscesses; and if anything remains, and the cold sore covers your fingers, and you doubt about hot abscesses, then leave the eye and treat the abscess with soothing things for hot abscesses; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do as many times as there are eyes which are corrected in this way.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, you should always take care to treat weak eyes with natural remedies and accidents with iron tools; never insert your hand into an eye during treatment if you can help it, until you see that the patient is suffering from that particular treatment.
des voines des eulz	of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Thus are red veins that cover the eye, tolerating its work and weakening the eye all day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore, the first thing you should do is look at the eye to see if it has red veins; then let him rest his head in your lap. Next, press those veins all around with your fingers according to your wisdom, and let the fingers be thin and delicate according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And two more in the .i. lid, very gently, according to this method:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then you press those veins gently, and draw out the blood drop by drop after each other, as much as you can, until you have removed the veins from the eye; and be careful not to hurt the eye with the points of the spatulas, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very diligent in your task so that you do not leave anything behind from the red veins. And when you have finished, distil into the eye green and red collyrium to corrupt what remains of the red veins.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot collect all of this in that hour, then make a plaster over the eye with soothing substances for the pain of them, and leave it for several days until the pain is eased and the hot abscess is secured, then begin again according to the method described earlier until it is healed; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	Look closely at 'arissati' fistula: when you heal it with cautery and medicine that burns according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, there is a gap in the eye where you cut into the abscess, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then it returns to all its instruments so that this is the form; and it is called a  'sharp chief', and should be made to grind down from there to the tip, and be pointed like a file as it is in the current form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put it on the site of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers and press your hand a little while until you feel that the corruption is gone; and do this several times, then restore the site with drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	if the veins are swollen, and a boil appears, and the body of the bow is swollen, then let it stay like this for 40 days; if it becomes inflamed and an abscess forms, you should know that he is not healed; if not, there is only one other way to cure the fistula: open the nostril with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it is opened, take the iron according to this form, and let the head of the iron have three angles, and the shaft be tapered until the tip, just as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then he places it on the bone of the ear, and moves his hand away from the eye a little, then returns to the entire forest until he pierces the bone and the patient feels it through the wind if he keeps his hand on his nose; and then restore the site with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the flesh heals and hardens, look at the matter of the nose; so it is easier for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are fully open all around and there is no disturbance to the eye or a decrease in vision, then you should ligate the patient; then bandage him, then place leeches on him without piercing the skin to draw out the blood, then apply an ointment made of acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla to the eye, and then bandage it with strips of linen according to the quantity that the eye needs; then tighten the bandage from above with a hard strip, and repeat the use of leeches without piercing the skin; then remove the leeches and leave the eye bandaged day and night, and if the ligature becomes loose, you should tighten it; then remove the ligature after a day and night, and if you see that the eye is healing, that is good; if not, then repeat the ointment and the bandages and the ligature and the leeches until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	from the rupture of a woven fabric
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in a woven fabric, it opens and looks like a grain of resin, and is frightening to see. Therefore, if you see it covered, the work is such that you pierce an needle into the root of the part below up to the part above; then pierce another needle where there is a double thread in the part of the armpit; and tie one end of the double thread around the fabric, and tighten it well, then remove the needle and apply a soft linen to the eye; and leave it until the thread breaks with the fabric, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed. Sometimes the wound is constrained by the fabric on each side in a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes give great appearance, then pierce them with a sharp spatulum which comes through the bottom of the eye, and cut away the white moist membrane and lower the eyes, and enter in at once; then extract it until he is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the bowels of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease, which is called "alcunnati", is nothing other than a boil that has formed in the eye, resembling descending water, but it is not water; and the manner of its appearance is such that you make the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat, then take his head in your hands from both sides and move it until you see the boil coming to the surface at your eyes; then it is pierced, and the light is lowered, and the patient sees things as he used to; and if it does not descend beneath, know that it is water, and if the descending of the boil is not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you cause the patient to sit between your hands, then take the spatulum and press it onto the conjunctiva under the cornea until the white membrane is exposed; and when it is released, drop into the eye hot water mixed with honey, or water in which fenugreek has been boiled with honey. Then let it heal with another treatment until it is cured.
des aigues de l’oil	of the eye's waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have discussed the similarities between diseases in their analysis and what must be done to pierce them; now act according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	You should cause the patient to sit between your crossed hands, away from sunlight, and examine the healthy eye and hold it tightly; then place the paper over the eye on your left hand if the eye is on the left, or on your right hand if the eye is on the right; then take in your right hand, if the eye is on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand if the eye is on the right; then place the point of the instrument along the cornea next to the white membrane of the eye at the part where the tear duct is smallest, and push the instrument called "almagda" gently, and turn your hand so that it pierces the white membrane of the eye, and you will feel that "almagda" reaches the empty space; and the depth of the path of "almagda" should be as far as the depth of the space between the pupil and the edge of the iris; this is the cornea of the eye; then you will see the bone in that paper due to the clarity of the cornea, and then push the instrument all the way to where the water is, then express it from under one path after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	if the water now runs down, let the patient see the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After a short rest, if the water runs back down the second path, push it out with the instrument, and when it is firmly lodged and does not run back up, gently pull out the almagna in circles with your hand a little at a time; then put in a little gem-stone water and remove it from that eye.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put on the eye some cotton or lamb's wool soaked in rose oil and egg white, and bind it with clean cloth.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, put on ground cumin mixed with a lot of egg white.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if  "almagda" cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, because there are some people whose eyes are too hard, then you should take the instrument called  "alberit", of which this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And so, having only punctured the conjunctiva, do not go too deep, but make the hole small; then put in the almagna as we have said, and when you have finished the operation, arrange for the patient to sleep on his back in a dark place; and he must avoid all movement, eat light food, not move his head to the right or left, and be bound according to his condition for three days; then untie him in the same dark place, test his vision, and show him some things; and then put the bandage on again until the seventh day; and you must not do this during the hour of the cure or after an incision now, but you should ease it so that the water runs down quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When this abscess has formed, you must loosen the eye before the seventh day, and receive instructions from one who heals abscesses; and when it is eased, loosen the eyelid and place a gold rim over it to cover any eye, and let it be in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	Then exit the house a little bit at a time, and return to your own case; and know that no disciple should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from Iraq who told us that in his land they pierce with alum, and they suck out the water, but nonetheless I have never seen anyone in our land doing this, nor have I read about it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.Et si en cest cas vees que li membres soit engourdis, tant qu’il ne se mueent point, si doit on le fere aler adés sus quelque membre ou autrui; mais s’il se mueit quelque chose, si convient il que tu le tiennes par force et le faisses aler au repos; et s’il est en tel cas que li membres soit entortuit ou qu’il se tordent l’un sur l’autrui, si doit on les tordre ains que les os se remettent a lor leu, et s’il sont tortus en telle maniere que les os ne puent venir a lor leu, si convient il que tu rompis li membres ou la jointure.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of almucad, for those who do not know them will see it; and they are properly made of copper:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let the heads be of this same subtlety, and the hindmost have three pointed ends.
de la char sor le neis	of the heart over the navel
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes there are born or born horses with various deformities, from which there are some that look like scorpions with many feet; and there are such horses with a hollow back of a bad color, and there are horses with a sore back of a good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	With one of these horses that is hollow-backed but not deformed, you should make the patient sit in your hands facing the sun; and open its nostrils, and pour honey into its nostrils, and drive out the evil spirits; then you can support what you can with a very subtle and sharp spatula on one side, as long as you know that the horse is completely healed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if anything remains that cannot be covered, open it with a very subtle instrument lightly so that nothing is left behind; and if without swelling, cut the abscess as it should be; and if they are malignant abscesses, hasten to cauterize them until the pus is drained and all the corruption is removed, then apply cold water or vinegar or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If it works and moisture comes up to the palate, know that there is no disease; but if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is new flesh in the bone above, from which the instruments cannot cut: therefore you must push a thread of linen through it, which is somewhat thick, and let it pass through the nostril on one side, leaving between each nostril a finger or more; and let the patient take hold of one end of the thread with his teeth in his mouth, and draw it until it comes out through the nostril into the mouth; and many children do this in school, and it is an easy matter for anyone who wants to do it; then hold one end that comes through the nostril in one hand, and the other end that comes through the mouth in the other hand, and gently pull them apart while holding them with your fingers.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do what you know corrupts the flesh, then draw out the thread, wash away the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and replace it in the nose as before; do this for 3 days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that is left of the flesh; and then put into the nose a plug of wool for several days until it is healed, and if he needs dry medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to cleanse the head, with which one distills oils and medicines into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	It should be made of silver or bronze, shaped like an open lamp, with a spout; and if you want, make a closed one, and let the instrument be full for purging the head; and there should be a handle on the head to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the heart over the navel
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called «telul» arises at the top of the navel and grows and becomes large, so that it is visible to the eye; therefore one should cut it at the beginning, and remove all the pus, then place upon it the cautery or burning medicine; and if one delays cutting until it has become large, then beware if it is hard, of dark color, and of poor sensation: do not touch it with iron, for it is an ulcerated abscess, for when one cuts it once, great harm comes to the patient. And if the abscess is due to a superficial touch, not of dark color, and you see that one can cut it all away, then empty the patient and cut it without fear, and treat the site with dry and constrictive substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the navel is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when solution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilage openings, it benefits little, unless in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore when this happens to someone, it is appropriate to see if the wound is full of blood; and therefore join the two lips with a stitch, then heal it; and if the lips are separated on one side or both sides, you must scrape all parts of their skin until they heal, then join the two lips with a stitch, and constrict them, and powder upon powder dragon's blood, and powdered incense; and put upon the powders a piece of strong plaster or other healing plaster, and leave it until it falls off by itself, then heal it with ointment.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of sewing is that you prepare the thread: either with needles, as we have said in sewing the belly; or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the mouth there are hard abscesses within the lips, resembling peas, small and large; therefore you must open the lips and slice through each pustule with a knife, and then grip them with tweezers and scrape away at each one; next apply powdered vitriol to the incision, until the blood is stanched; then use garlic and treat the area with dry remedies until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of gum tissue
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times a tumor grows on the gums, which the ancients call "albus"; you should hold it with tweezers, cut at its root, and let the blood or pus flow out; then apply crushed vitriol or other drying and constricting powders to the area; if the tumor returns after the incision, and this often happens, cut it again and cauterize it; if it does not return after cautery. These are the forms of tumors to be cut.
des sordens	of disorders.
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are attached to the roots of the teeth, in the mouth between the gums, and appear as ugly and rough growths; sometimes the teeth themselves become black, green, or yellow, as corruption spreads to the gums, and they emit a foul odor; you should have the patient lean forward so that his head is between your hands and his teeth are visible to you, then pick at the growths or discoloration until nothing remains; likewise with black, green, or yellow stains, clean them off completely; if they come off at first attempt, all the better; if not, repeat the process the next day or the day after, until everything is removed; know that teeth require different types of instruments for cleaning, depending on what the condition presents, so that the scrapers used to clean between the teeth have different forms from those used to clean the teeth themselves; these various forms and others should be prepared and ready.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When treating a toothache, you should not rush, but take as much time as possible, for there is no excuse for causing pain during the procedure.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then, when the patient is forced to pull, you must be certain of the tooth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain deceives the patient, and he thinks it is in a sound tooth, and makes him pull out a good tooth; and yet the pain does not go away because of this, as long as the evil tooth remains, for we have already tried this with those healers. And when you are quite certain of the decayed tooth, you must scrape around the tooth to the gum all around, then press it hard with your fingers or with fine tweezers at the front and back, until it is well loosened; then grip it firmly with the tweezers, and let the patient's head be between your knees, and hold it steady so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	Afterwards, pull out the tooth carefully without breaking it, and if it does not come out, take one of these instruments and put it inside on each side gently, then move it as you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and eaten away, then you should fill the holes with pieces of cloth, and gently hold it with tweezers so that it does not break while being held; and one must work carefully around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be sure to take care that you do not break it, and leave a part of it behind, causing greater pain due to the malicious root.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And beware of doing as ignorant surgeons do, who in their haste and arrogance sometimes break the jaw, not heeding what we have instructed; they sometimes bring about great illness due to the roots that remain, or by breaking the jaw, as we have often seen. And when the tooth is pulled, wash the area with wine or garlic and salt; and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, apply powdered vitriol to the site; and if that does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shape of the instruments with which you pluck out teeth first should have long points and broad handles so that they do not break when you pull on the tooth. The shapes are:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be made of strong material so that they do not bend when pulling, and made of good iron, and have teeth to hold the gums.
de la racine des dens	from the roots of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains in place, you must place wet cotton soaked in butter on it for a day or two.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	As long as the area is soft, then insert the tweezers that are called 'algefri', which make the shoulder look like a sick bird's beak; and inside they should be shaped like a file, that is their form.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots will not come out with all these tweezers, then you should uncover the flesh all around the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", which is to say a spatula, of which this is the shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And it should be strong and wide so that it does not break, and if the root pops out through this, that is good; if not, then use all the instruments, of which the shapes come below:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And one should use this instrument with two edges, of which this is the shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are in the reason of teeth, and of this instrument which looks like large tweezers, of which this is the shape:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this instrument be strong enough that it cannot break, and know that there are many dental instruments; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise master finds his own instrument according to what his works and the disease show him, for there are many diseases in which the ancients did not teach an instrument because of their diversity; and if it does not break in the cart or other bones, or it protrudes, then he seeks the instruments that he needs, as I have told you, and aids with gestures, by which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be thick and strong enough to hold the bone, so that it does not slip, but can be held and removed; and then restore the place with appropriate medicines, and if there is a protrusion in the bone, and it is small, then cut it with all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to nature's form, and its shape is ugly, especially in virgin women, then you should know if the tooth is new after the tooth, and is not in the right place, and cannot be filed or ground down; then pull it out; and if there is an abscess with the tooth, then take this instrument of which the form is like a small beak, and let it be made of tempered iron:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And pluck it gently several times a day because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others; and if it is apparent that it can be filed, then file it with one part of this file as shown in the form:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and is also like the lime with which needles are made; and in lime the tooth little by little in the hand, so that it does not move until it breaks; then smooth it at the end with a file, and if the tooth is too sharp and it pierces the tongue, it should be filed down so that it is even and does not pierce the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth loosen
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth has a hole in it from either an impact or by biting, and the patient cannot press on what he is eating without defecating, and you have treated them with constricting medicines but it does not work; then they should be restrained with a gold wire, because silver wires become green and rotten, but gold never moves. The wire should be medium-sized nor too thick or thin, according to the amount of space between the teeth. If you want to move the teeth, take the wire and wrap it twice around the two healthy teeth, then put the shoulder in between the teeth, whether there is one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then restart the bleeding as far as where you began, and stretch your hand gently and bleedingly, so that it does not move at all. The bleeding should reach the tooth's root so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then grip the head of the thread with pliers and assemble them, and place them between the healthy teeth, and put it in so that it does not bite the tongue; then leave it tight as long as it can stay, and if it comes loose or the threads break, tighten it with another thread; let it remain and serve like this throughout its lifetime, and this is the shape of the teeth and the arrangement of the two healthy and two diseased teeth, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when a tooth falls out, it is put back in its place, little by little, as we have said; and no one who is not wise and experienced should attempt this, for sometimes they make the shape of a tooth from cow's bone, and put it in the place where there is a defect, and bind it as we have said, and it remains and serves thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	cut the vein of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Sometimes this ligament which comes under the tongue is congenital; sometimes it is caused by a wound. The treatment is to open the mouth of the patient, press his head against your healthy teeth, and lift up his tongue; then grasp the broad ligament with tweezers as far down as the tongue can be separated from its bed, and if there is any swelling or nodule - which indicates an abscess - cut it out. Be careful not to make the incision too deep so as not to injure the artery underneath. When you are done, rinse the mouth with rose water or cold water, then place a linen tent under the tongue; every night smear the wound with pitch so that no scabs can form.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if there is bleeding, place powdered vitriol on the area; and if the blood stops, cauterize with a lentigo cautery, which is good for this. Then treat it further until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you see the vein is dark or black and hard, and the patient does not feel any pain, do not touch it because it is a ulcer. If it is declining to become a blister and there is moisture, cut it with a spatulum, freeing it from both sides. If bleeding occurs due to your action, apply ground vitriol until it stops; then return to your treatment, pulling everything out; then raise the area with garlic and salt, and treat the wound further until it heals.
des apostemes de la gorge	of abscesses in the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes there are sores in the throat called "godath", and they are properly called almonds, and when you treat them as we have said in the division, and they do not heal, be careful: if they are hard abscesses of a small size and dark color, do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also for fear of bleeding; but let it be until it is cured, and then you will burst it, or it will burst by itself; and if it is a white color with a thin root, have the instrument to cover it, but first look to see if the abscess is calm and pacified.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then make the patient sit facing the sun, and have his head in your lap, and open his mouth and hold his tongue between your fingers, and press down on the tongue under all the instrument, from which this is the shape; and it should be made of silver or thin bronze just like a knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Then you press the tongue with this instrument, and you see the abscess, grab it with the tweezers and pull it up into the almond, and draw any threads of the warts with it; then cover the instrument, which is shaped like a needle, so that it appears sharp; and yet the ends are curved, one towards the other, and they are very pointed, and it is made of iron or bronze:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument at hand, then cover it with tongs, shaped like a needle:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	Let it be sharp on one side and blunt on the other, and when you have cut one of the tonsils, cut the other according to this same method; then after the incision, gargle the patient with warm water, and with water and garlic, and if there is bleeding, gargle with water, or with the peels of pomegranates that are cooked, or with myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then cure it until it heals; and sometimes other abscesses other than the two tonsils appear in the throat, so cut them then as you did the two tonsils.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, namely a small abscess; and she had a very tight closure all throughout the throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passageway which was blocked, and she could not eat or drink, and would have died if she stayed like that for another day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess had become so swollen that it had forced out two bumps through the two openings of the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I hurried therefore, and stuck in the hook into one of the openings, then drew out a large piece of pus; then I did the same on the other side of the nose, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards, I stuck the hook into the abscess, and scooped out a portion, and only a little blood came out; thus the passageway in her throat was cleared, and she began to drink water and wine, and continued to cut into the abscess for a long time; and the abscess re-grew and filled up the space that I had emptied, so that it became very large; therefore, I lanced it and cauterized it inside her throat; thus it did not grow any more; and I left these parts, and do not know what happened to her after me.
de l’uve	of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the eye descends to the socket and it is swollen and long, it is called 'perpendicular'. And if it is fat and round below, it is called an 'eye'.
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the pus in the abscess is settled, and it is subtle, then you should cut it; and one that is round and not long; and if it is blood-red or dark red or black, then you should avoid cutting it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it according to the manner that I have said, from its white and length, you should make the patient sit facing the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument of which we have made mention earlier; then insert the needle into the eye, and draw it out, and cut it at the one of the two instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you should not cut more than the excess that is beyond the natural limit; because if you cut more, it will hurt the voice and speech. And after the incision, use what we said about the incision of the two testicles, and treat it until it heals.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient fears being cut, then you should use the cautery of the sense of fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the way of the cautery is for acute pain.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is that the patient puts his head in yours, and then presses his tongue against the instrument we described in the chapter on cautery, and breathes in through it with live coals, so that it is not too thick or too thin; and use the shaft of this instrument, which has this shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And on the head there is a hair or place where medicine is applied, like the edge of a spoon, and the instrument is placed on all the medicine over the iris; and the patient should lie on his side, so that saliva and mucus flow from his mouth due to the medicine inside, so that it does not go down the throat and into the lungs. Then hold your hand over the medicine and press it against the iris for about half an hour, until you see it become numb and the stinging of the medicine subside; then take some cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into the eye so that the cotton is pressed against the iris; do this frequently until the cautery is complete, then leave it to dry and fall off after four or five days. If you need to renew the cautery with medicine, do so, and afterwards rinse the eye with cold water, and treat it with gargarisms until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is safer than incision or cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calamin, hyssop, oregano, rue, chamomile, avens, and similar herbs, and mix all or some of them in one pot, and add garlic, and let it boil. The pot should be well-glazed with strong clay, and the instrument inside should be bent according to this shape:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it can be made of silver or bronze, and one of the ends should be pushed into the mouth of the patient so that the vapors rise into the uvula through the tube until the uvula is deadened. Then he should do this often until the uvula dries out, and take care not to do this at the beginning of a hot abscess, because many things can happen there; nor should this be done beyond the decline of a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put an egg white inside the tip, so that the patient's mouth is not too hot; because the egg white will not let the vapor weigh down the mouth, and it is a good remedy together with salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times there is a bone or fish spine, or some object stuck in the throat; therefore, you should try to remove whatever you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all your strength, so that you can move the object; and if it does not come out and is stuck in the throat, you should make the patient vomit until the food is digested in the stomach; perhaps the object will come out through vomiting. Or the patient might swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a dry piece of bread; tie a string to the sponge and then swallow it; when it reaches the spot, it will get stuck, and then you can pull it out; and if it does not come out in the way we have described, take an instrument made of soft lead according to this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And the instrument should be curved at the tip so that it can enter the throat more easily, and the tip should be lifted upwards; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, or it may cause harm, and do not push the os down; and move the patient's head so that they can swallow the instrument, in order for them to dislodge the object; then, they can either swallow the instrument, or you can pull it out along with the object.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the blood from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Sometimes the bleeding is medicine, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not help, then look into the throat of the patient facing the sun, then press his tongue with the instrument that I told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the bleeding, draw it out with a small hook, or with fine tweezers that are suitable for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, take a heated iron wand and put it in the patient's throat, then put the hot end of the wand on the shoulder, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient has fever all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take clean water in a glass, open the mouth and pour it in without swallowing, and move the jaw frequently with their hand; as soon as the patient feels the water, they will spit it out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not spit out as we have said, then suffocate the patient with assafetida, using the instrument that I described for fumigation of the throat; do this many times, for it will come out without harm.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the way to do the fumigation is to take a pot with burning coals, and have the container covered with a perforated lid, and in the hole place the head of the instrument; then pour in the smoke, and have the patient put their mouth over the end of the pipe, closing their mouth so that the smoke cannot escape, but goes into the throat; and the blood will come out now, and if it does not, repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient be thirsty, eating salted and dry things, and drink no water; and then it will be necessary for them to go to the toilet.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument with which one treats hemorrhoids, when one can see it, resembles bent tongs in order to be able to enter the throat; and it has the appearance of a bird's beak, and it has roughness like sandpaper, so that what it seizes, it cannot let go; and here is its form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the abscess-draining instruments
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	There are many types of abscesses, according to what recollections come later in this book from one person and another, and they vary in penetration and size; and there are two kinds, one is in its appearance the same, and that which holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second kind is due to the locations in the body where they occur.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundations, and the abscesses of fleshy places are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own treatment in practice.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And for some abscesses one must not pierce until the bowels are dead according to their fulfillment; and there are others which one must pierce when they are crusty, and they do not die according to their fulfillment, such as abscesses near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses occur near joints, and one lets them be until they are soft all around, by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint may become corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.Et si on les percet tant qu’il sont crut, li membre est en perile de contractere, car ne poent le nerf et li lien se remuer ains qu’il soit curat; et si on les laisse porris entor, si sont li membres en gran danger.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Or the abscess is near the principal member, and if you delay piercing it until it has reached its peak, it will harm the principal member; or if it is near the foundation, pierce it so that it may be cured; but you must not pierce an abscess without digestion being complete, except for one that is near the foundation, lest it burst inside and lengthen, causing a fistula which will take a long time to heal.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	It is necessary for you to know the time of piercing the abscess which is dead according to its fullness, and that is when the pain is relieved, and the departure of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and from the discharge and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary for you to make the piercing at the highest point of the abscess, and where there is movement; and let the piercing be long in the body, and if the abscesses are in the hands or feet, or in joints and on nerves and arteries, and in all places equally where there is no fold.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	For those who bend, according to the affected member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to let it be until digestion is complete and confirmed, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before then, the body will be filled with poison from the abscess, and the lips and depths of it may harden.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if on any abscess that are pierced according to the size of the body, according to what the member needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you should treat small abscesses with small openings; and large abscesses with large openings, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are abscesses where one should cut into the core, and cover it; when it has become as soft as a drape, and is deadened, then one should do as one does with blisters: and there are some that are split in three angles; and there are some which one covers just like the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses of the bowels; and there are some where one makes a round incision, and other incisions, and similar covering.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who do not have a head, like a superficial abscess, one should pierce it plainly; and when the abscess is large, and has drawn great pus, and you pierce it, then one should not draw out all the pus in that hour, but some part of it; then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out some more; do this several times a day, until all the pus comes out; likewise if the patient is of weak constitution, or a woman carrying child, or a small child, or an old decrepit man.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the expert sometimes jumps with the release of wind, which by chance kills the patient, and you do not notice.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid this chapter with great caution; and when you have perceived your abscess, open the wound and examine if the abscess wound is small; and if it is a flat wound, apply tents made of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess with many openings, you should insert a tent in each opening so that they face each other; and if you have cut into the skin around the abscess and pulled it forward, you should fill it with old cotton or the shavings of linen fabric without moisture, and bandage it for three days; then remove the bandage and treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs due to your work, bring cold water and a cloth, and hold it over the bleeding area many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding continues, apply treatment and healing, and the powders I have described earlier in this book. If it is during winter, and the area is very nervous, you should place warm tents and moistened cloths in wine and hot oil over the wound for a third of a day, as we have said; then open the abscess, wash and treat it, as it should be, until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And now you must understand universally about the treatment of abscesses; I have told you how one should go about treating abscesses, and you will find this chapter [on the subject].
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	From the neck come small abscesses, which are similar to those that appear on our heads, like the spots on a guinea fowl, and there are many kinds of these.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some which have fat and such where there is moisture as well as pulp; and there are some which are hard and stony in texture, and there is no doubt if the artery does not cause opposition.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the shoulder is that you should test with every instrument which is called a 'dislocation', whose form comes later, depending on what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, they will draw it out from above the length.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is evacuated, they scorch without leaving anything behind that contains the moisture, for it will return as soon as something is left there; then plunge cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and salt, and apply to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and those who remain overnight will be cured.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then return to the cotton, as before, on the second and third days, until you are sure that it is not sore at night; then clean the wound with ointment, as appropriate, until it heals.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess contains pus, then open it according to this method: cut it lengthwise, and squeeze out the pus from all sides, and apply all your treatment to drawing it out above the wound; and if the artery beats strongly, do as I have told you before.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also treat an abscess if it is stone-like, and cut and clean it as I have told you.Car la piere adessourve li tuit la membre por quoy elle gist, et al cote ou elle est adessourve, et le membre adessourve li tuit de la cotte ou il gist; et la cotte a l’adessourvance de la piere.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the stone hurts all around where it lies, and the part where it is located hurts, and the limb hurts all around where it lies; and the skin hurts at the location of the stone. And cutting into the stone-like abscess and the moist one is easier, because they are filled with pus and blood.Car si li aposteme est de sang ne puce, il est de poque de sang et de sanc, et al pletz du corps ou il gist, car li sang al pletz s’en va.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if there is no moisture in any of these abscesses on the head, and there were some that I copied from the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and could not be broken; and if anyone had cut it, it would have made a wound just like a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses that come on the head, except those that occur on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should be made in the most dependent part to allow the pus to flow out; and treat them as appropriate.
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses occur on the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes elsewhere in the body; they are large and interconnected with each other.Ande leu de ces apostemes, si est qu’il vait la pluit et la fumee, li ou il ne vait pas, il faut que l’ovre et qu’il cure le mues, et que il li ovre et qu’il cure la piere aussi; car il est maintes foiz la piere dedenz l’aposteme, et s’il n’est pas ovree, et ne est la piere extraite, il ne peut gueres guarir.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly within its coat, as the nodule and abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many resembling these scrofulae.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are wicked ones that will not obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Therefore, in that one which you see to be of good disposition for cauterization, and resembling the color of the body, and flat on each side, and not raised towards the nerves of the neck or the artery or the channel, and not deep; you should cover it from above, and scrape away at each part, and have the two lips of the heart at an angle, if you need to, as we said about abscesses in the head; and draw it out little by little, and be sure that you do not cut into the nerve or vein, and let there not be an ague nor trembling so that the hand does not shake, and do not look too far ahead, so that you do not cover anything that you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	If you grasp the vein or artery and it does not yield to your touch, then put into the wound vitriol ground up, or some powders that stop bleeding, and tie off the wound; and leave it until the abscess is calmed down and the wound softens and begins to suppurate.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the blood is stanched, return to your work until you have completed it; then examine with your finger if there are any small scrofulae remaining, and pick them out and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrofula, you should not pick out that scrofula at its root, but ligature it with a double strong thread and let it hang loose without harm; then treat the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then heal it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut away the entire scrofula, then you should bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now so that there remains no superfluity due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	you should proceed to cut away its root, and draw it out, and sew it up as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofulas which hold superfluity, pierce where it appears to be dying; and pierce it thus as the one before was said, depending on it, then minister tenting with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what is remained of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleansed, then cure it with ointment enjoining flesh, until it is healed.
de squinance	[of scrofula]
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients wrote and spoke of throat surgery; but I have never seen anyone in our land perform it, and this is the record of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those with squinance, it is necessary to cut into the throat, which is called the "epiglottis"; and one should not hesitate to do this, because all the veins and the lung of the patient are affected by the heat of the abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both armpits.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the lung, one must cover the epiglottis to prevent asphyxiation due to strangulation.Si li maladie est en la gorge et qu’il soit necessaire de le fendre, il covient que li fendure soit a l’epiglote, ou li maladie ne pueda aver finne; car la est lor mort.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we want to split the epiglottis, we should split it underneath three circles or four a small split crosswise between the two circles, or according to the quantity of the split in the hyoid bone; and those places which are subject to the section of the epiglottis where there is no flesh, and the vessels are long from within.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, then he should stretch the skin of the throat to its fullest extent, then split the throat as far as the voice box; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then close the wound, as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the windpipe of the larynx which jumps out through the opening that is broken, and by the loss of voice; and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed for which one doubts the strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound from the heart, and cut all the way to the cartilage; then administer remedies that promote the growth of flesh, until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albuchasis says that one should not do this until the throat is completely choked, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the lack of air has ceased.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then cover the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe in, and he will breathe out through the wound, and thus is preserved from death; and for this reason, the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease passed, which passes in three or four days. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and cure it, once it was cured; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw a maiden take a knife and thrust it into her throat, cutting part of the windpipe; and I was called to heal her, and found her as good as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I exposed the wound and found that blood had come out of it, and judged that it had not bled well or been treated properly before, as the blood was still flowing from the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried and sewed up the wound and healed her until she was cured; and the maiden had no more trouble with her voice, and returned to her usual state; hence I say that one should have no fear of cutting into the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This type of abscess is called a "hernia in the throat", and it is a large abscess the color of a plum, and it occurs frequently in women; and there are two types: natural and accidental; the natural kind has no cause.Accidental hernia occurs when something blocks the throat so that food cannot pass through, or if someone drinks too much wine and gets sick, causing food to ferment in the stomach; or if someone drinks cold water after eating too much, and causes the stomach to swell; or if someone drinks too much wine on an empty stomach, making him sick.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accident happens in two ways, one of which is similar to a boil on our bodies, and the other way is like an abscess that comes from an artery; and there is fear, and one should not operate by making force except in the small one, and test and search throughout the entire wound: if you find it as hard as a nail, and it cannot be opened in any way, then cut it, just as nails are cut, and treat it all over its surface, if there is none; and search thoroughly, and cure it as it should be, until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many types of boils, and I will describe all their appearances; and now I must explain the entire difference between a boil and an abscess.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that an issue is when there is a fever and heat, until the ebullition has passed and the porridge is complete; then the fever and heat cease.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With a boil, there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body; and it begins just like a pimple, and becomes large; and they have two appearances, either dry or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division.And li nouts ne doivent mie eslonger sur la chair, si com les issues, car il conviennent que li nout soit adont qu’il esteit, et li issue se move et va par tout le cors; et sont selonc ij maniere, ou sec, ou moiste: selonc la maniere qui est moiste, est selonc ij semblanz, ou selonc aposteme de artere, ou selonc nout de gras.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	You should, when you come to the treatment of the cold, first test and examine it with all the instruments that are called "intramural", according to what its form will lead to in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of inquiring into abscesses in the brain is to press on the wettest place that you find in the abscess, and gradually turn your fingers, until you feel that the instrument has pierced the core; then, depending on the size of the abscess, draw out the instrument, and be careful not to push too far.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the pus flows freely, whatever its color, treat it as I have described for other abscesses; and if after the instrument is withdrawn no pus comes out, know that it is solid, so treat it in a cross shape, and grasp it with pincers, and carefully scrape each side and remove the dead tissue where it lies, so that you draw it out healthy with the nerve; and if you cannot draw it out healthy, then cut it away in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if nothing is done, the nose will return many times; and if something is done to stop it for a little while, and the wound is not painful, apply some corrosive powders and bind up the wound with hot poultices, and treat it with other remedies until it heals; and if the nostril is large, cut off the two edges of the wound, and treat it with remedies that cause scabs.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the bleeding vessels are contrary or elsewhere, and you are in a hurry, use powdered vitriol, and leave it for two or three days until the wound suppurates and the blood stops flowing; then return to treating what has been delayed.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of the trocar, which are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are three types of handle called 'albaret', and one type called 'breb'; and there are also three kinds: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the aperture of the fistula; and they are like needles used to pierce sorcerers' marks, made from brass, iron, or silver, but the yellow ones are best and most proven, made from black lead, for treating fistula.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	There are many forms of warts, as you can see: large, medium, and small; some have two curves in three ways; some have three curves and are also in three ways; some have two curves and warts with only one curve, and they are in three ways; and all of these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The tips of these knives are sharp, and some only cut one side, so they don't damage the vein or nerve; and with these instruments, warts are removed from many places, so that the patient does not suffer when opening an abscess; and there are three types: large, small, and medium, as you can see; and they are only used on fleshy parts, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar areas; and sometimes another small instrument is made, resembling slices of fingernails, according to this shape, with which blood is stopped.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and one puts it sometimes in the place that heals by cutting off the veins, and the arteries, and sometimes they are tied according to this great shape:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	The nipples of some men become swollen when they become corrupt, appearing like women’s nipples; they remain ugly and swollen, and if one wishes to cure them, one must apply the cautery according to this method from line b to g.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scorch the fat, and treat the wound with ointment containing charcoal, then sew together the two lips of the wound, and heal it until it is cured; and if the nipple hangs down and becomes soft due to its size as happens to women, then cut it into two slits at the top, so that one slit is attached to the other at the end, so that the larger slit holds the smaller according to this form, from line b to g; then scorch the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about sewing and powders, and whatever is necessary in the treatment, until it is cured; and if it is not cured, or the incision is not completely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood flow, then you must fill the wound with wet cotton in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it absorbs the remainder of the fat, then cure it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the testicles
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses which come underneath the armpits are types of hard scrofula where there are nodules and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture must be cut according to this shape, from line b to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus within the abscess has been drained, fill the wound with clean cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and treat it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, they should be treated as we have described for fissures of scrofula, and if the wound becomes swollen, they should apply a cautery as we have described before.
de la routure de l’artere	from bleeding of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is open and the skin above it is attached, this often leads to abscesses; and so too when it affects the vein and becomes swollen and abscessed. One can tell which it is by the nature of the abscess: if it is due to the artery, the abscess will be long and deep; but when it is from the vein, there will be a red discoloration visible. It is foolishness to cover this type of abscess, especially when located under the nails or on the fingers and toes, as well as on the neck and in many other places, since it can become very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore one should avoid cauterization with iron, and when it is on the head one should also avoid cautery there; if it is an abscess due to the artery opening under the skin, one must make an incision along the edge of the artery until it is exposed; then insert a needle underneath, piercing through to the other side, and bind the artery with a double thread in two places according to how I instructed you regarding the extraction of the two temporal arteries. Then tie off the area between the two threads with a ligature, so that the blood flows out from the vein; then treat it with an appropriate poultice until it heals. If the abscess is due to an incision in the vein, one must take some of the pus and smear it over all the skin around the abscess, and then insert a needle under where one is holding the pus, piercing through to the other side, and tie off a double thread so that you can draw out the pus; then bind the abscess as I described, at either end with the thread; if you are worried the thread will slip out, insert another needle under the entire abscess, following the incision of the first needle, and tie off the threads in four places. Then lance the abscess so that the excess fluid drains, and after lancing it scrape away the pus from the skin and leave only what is attached; then apply a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil, and treat with poultices and ointments until it heals.
des apostemes des ners	of the abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, as an abscess comes in the artery and vein, so does an abscess come to the nerves when they are bruised or from too much exertion, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens most often in the shoulders and elbows and throughout all joints where there are apoplexies, and it is a painful swelling, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in various dispositions without pain; and when one applies pressure to it properly, the patient feels pain, and it is not deep within the body but beneath the skin; and it is mute in all places, and it neither goes forward nor backward, nor downward nor upward, and that which is in joints should not be covered by iron: for perhaps there would be contraction; and that which is on the head or forehead, treat with a poultice.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the swelling is small, hold it with tweezers and cut it at its root; and if it is large, pierce it with an awl, then scrape it, then cut out the bone and close the wound with sutures, and heal it.
des grosses boces pendans	large boils hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	At times it occurs in bellies and not elsewhere; it is a disease called "mushroom" due to its resemblance to mushrooms, with thin roots and thick stalks. There are small and very large ones; I saw a man who had two in his belly that looked more like mushrooms than anything else, without any difference, they were white, had thin roots, and were slightly split, and moisture ran from them.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I cut them and found one weighing 18 ounces and the other 6 ounces; the treatment for this is to make an incision so that you can see the moisture, and the color of the joint is white and moist with thin roots. Then apply the fire cautery widely, and have the patient hold steady so that the eyes do not move until they grow.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For in cutting there are often large bleeding wounds, and if the blood stops, then quickly cauterize it; and if you see the patient is frightened and fearful of the iron incision, take a well-prepared piece of black thread, and tie the joint as we have said, and leave it for 2 days; then constrict it, and do not stop constricting the black thread until he cuts the joint, and let him heal without difficulty. And if the roots are large, it is frightening to cut into the belly, but you can certainly cut half of it, then cauterize it so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and be careful not to cut into the skin which is discolored and poor-looking and milky in appearance.Li home qui ont a funge le thelul si comme nos avons dit, covient que tu coper les arteluls et li gros estomach, et les chiez de l’estomach, et ne cesser de coper tant qu’il cope l’artelul et li chiez, et li gros estomach, et li funge.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of cancer next.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil bursts
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the boil comes from cautery of a wound or from a fissure in the syphiloma, and it is on the belly and in some of the bowels, as happens in other ulcers, or from blood which flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from wind; and if it is from the ulceration of the syphiloma and from the outlet of the bowel, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and it discharges in various ways.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is through the outlet of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it with their fingers, it will pop back out, and sometimes it will be dry, and it will grow larger at the entrance of the bath and with great effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is from moisture, it is a light thing, and it opens well when you press it with your hand, and it does not constrict; and if it is from blood, then the abscesses are large and hard, and they are fixed according to a quantity; and if it is from wind, then it is soft to the touch, and the action is that you should look to see whether the appearance is due to blood from an artery or vein, or wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you need to let the wound heal.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is in the intestines or bowels, then you should tell the patient to hold his breath and be stretched out straight, then sign all around the wound; then have him lie down between your hands, then go around the area that you have marked for the spatumile, then press down on half of the abscess above the large nail; then tie it tightly with a strong thread or strong silk rope, and let the patient's hand hang free; then work on the other half of the abscess stretched out over the rope, and insert your finger, and feel for the intestines; if you find them caught in the rope, release them from the abdomen; and if you find the bowels, grasp them at the nail and cut away the excess; and if the artery or vein is causing resistance, go around it gently and then return to your work and take two needles and thread two strong fibers through them, and insert the needles into what you have made into a cross so that you pierce it; then pull out the abscess in four places on the needles, and when you see it, remove the needles and leave the wound open until it drains, and scrape away the dead flesh by itself; when it is thin and draining, clean the wound as appropriate, and close the wound.
dou chancre	from cancer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have already discussed the types of cancer, how to treat them with medication, and how to avoid using iron in the treatment. Now, let's talk about cancer that appears on the skin, which requires great caution during treatment. According to the ancients, when cancer is found in places where it can be easily scraped off, such as on breasts, thighs, or similar areas, it should be completely removed during its early stages. However, once it becomes large and established, you shouldn't attempt to treat it, as I have never seen anyone heal from it, nor has anyone healed from it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, you should first purge the patient with black bile; then let them bleed if there is an evident repletion; then clean the area where the cancer is located; cut off all hair, skin, and bone from the affected area without leaving anything behind; let the blood flow freely, and squeeze out any remaining blood with your hand or a tool; if the bleeding from the artery or vein opposes your incision, cauterize it until the blood vessels are sealed. Then treat the wound further until it heals.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already discussed in the section on idiopathic edema how the accumulation of fluid occurs and the signs of each type, as well as the treatment with medication and that which is treated with iron. Only these two conditions are mentioned; one should not use iron for these two conditions: tympany and hydrops, as they are fatal. Therefore, when treating this type of edema called "eclites" with medications, and if the treatment does not help, consider whether the patient is weak or has other illnesses besides idiopathic edema, such as diarrhea and similar conditions; in that case, do not use iron, as there is a risk involved. But if you see that the patient is strong and only has idiopathic edema, and is neither too young nor too old, then proceed as follows: lift the patient straight up, and press on their abdomen to push the fluid to the lowest part of the leg, then take the spiny spatulum according to this description:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And it has two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And it has a point, and yet it is not so sharp that it can reach the intestines when pushed in, nor can it cause bleeding; then examine whether the dropsy is towards the intestines: if so, you should make your incision straight under the armpit on the right side; and if it is due to liver disease, the incision should be on the left side; and if it is due to the womb, it should be on the right, and the patient must not lie on the incision so that the fluids do not flow to that weak spot; then cut through the skin with your instrument, and insert it, and lift your hand to the spatumile between the skin and the syphon as you would when skinning a finger or toe; then pierce the syphon so that the spatumile comes out in the desired location, and this is where the water will come out; then pull the instrument out, and insert this tool from which the fluid will drain:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	It resembles a fine silver needle and is made of bronze or lightweight brass, with a small hole in the lower part. On one side there are three holes; on another, two; on another, one; and on the other side, one. The head is shaped like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes make to the quill.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	at the top is the alamenol, so that when the instrument comes to the boil, it descends immediately upon the instrument; empty out half or a third of it, for if you empty more than is appropriate in that hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit through the weapon, or he will faint, or he will approach death; but empty it according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the patient's virtute indicate, and his pulses; then withdraw the instrument and retain the water, which is retained now by the cork that blocks the hole in the syringe, about which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner; then renew the instrument the following day, if you see the patient enduring it, and draw off a small quantity of water; do this every day, and be wary of causing him any pain as long as he still has some water left.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt the disease, and you leave it with a lot of water, with hot sand or ash, and by much sweating or bathing and in the sun, and if it turns purple from drinking; and cure it with desiccating medicines until it is healed, and cauterize over the stomach and over the liver and over the spleen after the extraction of water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	on the swelling of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born without a foreskin, or with a small foreskin, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If necessary, he should pierce the foreskin very gently with a very fine needle according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then he puts a tiny plug of lead into the foreskin, and ties it and leaves it there for three or four days, and when he wants to urinate, he removes the plug, urinates, and then replaces the plug; and perhaps it is not necessary at all, because the urine that comes out will open the foreskin.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those with a small wound, if treated with the plaster of lead white, as we have said, will open up.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have an opening in their place are bloated, for some are born with an opening at the head of the penis, which prevents them from urinating unless they lift their penis upwards; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot reach the urethra, and this is a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, then the head of the penis and the foreskin are cut to the size of a feather, so that the slit falls in the middle, as it should be; and take care to avoid bleeding which often occurs, and if it does, stop it with a cauterization of wax, and cure the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these warts come on the penis, and it is an ugly skin appearance; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so you should pick them with a needle, and cut and clean them all, then put on cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then cure it with fine ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, with pus-colored and foul-smelling discharge, then you should apply a cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cleaned it, and if the ulcer is on the shaft of the penis, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, then you must first remove the ulcer that is inside; and when it is healed, treat the external portion.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it together, if the foreskin is not secured so that it is not pierced, then blackness and corruption comes in his penis and scrotum; therefore, cut off all that is black and corrupt, then apply a poultice of honey and flour made from pomegranate rinds and nuts, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if there is bloodletting, bring the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauteries help in two ways together: that is, in bloodletting and corruption; and if the foreskin is swollen and retracted, then you must insert a lead tube into the penis and let the patient urinate through it; and when the foreskin is red and swollen at the tip of the penis, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, either because of a wound or an abscess, then you must excise it with an instrument, as far as the glans, and loosen all the skin around the tip of the penis; and if it is a difficult thing to cure, then you must excise it using spatumile, a small tool made from the horn of a ram, at the tip of the penis and through the foreskin; then draw them apart gently and insert a fine linen cloth dampened with cold water between them so that they do not adhere again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a natural process like other wounds; nonetheless, when we perform this act intentionally, especially on infants, it is necessary for us to do the best and most gentle job for their well-being.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not tell of the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the greatest part of masters and surgeons who did circumcision around one inch, and to many forces, and to all a new foreskin; then the wound healed because there were two membranes, and occasionally one above copes and remains below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Then they recover covering, and the pain is double, and in the cleansing which is of the glans is not assured the tip of the member; and in the cleansing of the nail occasionally the iron slips, and they ruin the work, and many times they are born so that they do not need cleansing, and I have seen this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the cleansing which is done to many forces, I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut justly as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, you cut evenly into it all around; but the thread should be tightly tied around the skin; and the manner of the first work is such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only tying the thread around the rod, and then you make him push out in every way you can; then you hold him upright between your hands, and support his weight between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the rod and breathe on it, and pull it upward so that the head of the rod goes in; then cleanse it well from the filth that has gathered there, then tie the place marked by a double thread, then tie it under the second time; hold it with two fingers at the second binding to the pouch and the index finger, and press between the two bindings, then lift the skin quickly and pull the head of the rod; then let the blood run little by little, for that is the wound; and put powder on top of the powder, a cloth glued with an egg cooked in rose water, confited with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it until the next day, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The shape of the fingers at the cleansing should be like this: both knuckles should be tense and pointed, and the fingers as thick as the palm equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	the error of purification is when the cut inside bleeds; therefore you must extend it with your fingernail so that the wound forms an abscess; and scrape it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, hold it with tongs and then scrape it.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it lasts for 3 days, and what is under the foreskin is swollen, let it be until the abscess is relieved and the scab is light; then scrape as much as you can move, and beware of the part of the foreskin, it will not harm him at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore treat the place of sudden wounds with powder, which we discussed in the treatise on powders, and if it scrapes beyond measure and goes upward, it will not harm; therefore treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	from the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to a stone, or congealed blood, or a tumor, or similar things that we have mentioned in the division; and if the urine is not released, and you see that it is being retained by the stone which is lodged in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent over his knees; and his feet should be placed on his back, and he should stretch his abdomen from above the back, and the patient should strain as hard as he can; and thus the neck of the bladder will be forced to expel the stone upwards, which will release the urine; and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction using an instrument called a "syringe", which has this shape: and it should be made of thin silver, like the feather of a bird; and the cane should be about a palm and a half long, and thin at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the way to pass urine is to take a doubled thread and tie it to the tip of a piece of wool or cotton, and put the tip of the thread into the syringe; and squeeze out the excess wool and fill the syringe up to the tip, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and almond oil, and have the patient sit on a seat, and raise his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water; then gently put the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the scrotum; then fill the syringe up to the bladder, and feel the patient's bladder emptying, and if this is not done in this order, then the person guiding where it goes is doing it wrong; then pull out the thread all the way through the wool, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out, and let the urine flow; and repeat with the syringe until the bladder is empty and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When blistering or bleeding occurs in the bladder, or pus is accumulated there, and you see water and medicine dripping out, then do all the apparatus that is called "clepsydra", and this is how to make it.
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed and has three openings: two on one side and one on the other, as you can see. The location of the hairs through which the short catheter is inserted should be such that it blocks the urethra without any additions, so that the moisture can be drawn out and injected when necessary; and when you see your medicines moving in the bladder, place the tip of the catheter into the moisture and withdraw while pulling on the other end; you will draw the moisture into the catheter and then push hard on the end that is outside. The moisture will then enter the bladder and the patient will feel it; this is the way to perform a subtle enema to cleanse the bladder: it works like this:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is made of silver or brass, and the head is higher; and under it there is a testicle or two testicles hanging; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture in which you want to cleanse the bladder, then tie it between the two testicles with a strong double thread, and heat this moisture over the fire; then insert the tip of the enema into the urethra, and squeeze your hand over the bladder gently until the moisture enters the bladder, and the patient will feel that the moisture has arrived in the bladder. If you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, punch a hole through it, and then thread a strong wire through these holes; assemble the circle as one would assemble a quiver, and put inside what you want: oil, moisture, and water, and insert it into the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, squeezing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	of stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already discussed in the division of stones, and their extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between a stone lodged in the ureter, and all the signs, and in which type of stone one must operate with cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder happens most often to children, and it is a sign that the urine flows from the bladder resembling water in its subtlety; and it appears yellow, and the patient feels pain in his penis, and he can urinate many times, and then it blocks up; and most of these have the foundations; and the healing is easier for children until they are 4 years old, and it is much more serious in the elderly, and it is intermediate in those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient through an enema, in order to draw out all the feces that are in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it sometimes blocks the search for the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet and lift him up and move him about, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes comes out from above; then let him sit between your hands, which are prepared for this purpose, and his hands should be beneath his thighs, so that the bladder is completely inclined downward; then probe and touch inside; if you feel the stone in the space, then hasten to cut on the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not come out on touching all around, then moisten your left index finger with oil, if the patient is elderly, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and strong; then insert it into his anus, and probe for the stone, and when you feel it at your finger, push it toward the neck of the bladder; then press with your finger, and push the stone out where you intend to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the assistant to press on the bladder with his hand, and instruct the patient to lift his testicles up with his right hand, and with his left hand pull back the skin underneath the testicles in the area where the incision is made; then insert the spatulum, which has a curved shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And they make it between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the navel; and let it be straight on the stone, and both hands must be on the anus, and the incision must be through the belly so that it is wide by force, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; perhaps the pressure makes the testicle which is in the anus jump out without effort; and know that there is a kind of stone with angles and edges: this is difficult to extract. And there is a kind that is below, similar to a grape, and round, whose extraction is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And for those therefore that have angles and edges, make the incision larger; and if it does not jump out, you must pull with tweezers which are like a file at the end, to pull out the stone so that it does not slip; or you insert under it a small instrument curved at the end; and if you cannot grasp it thus, then widen the opening, and if the blood comes out, pull it with vitriole; and if there is more than one stone, then insert first the largest into the neck of the bladder, then push upwards, then pull out the larger ones, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are several.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then it must be cut, and a larger wound made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine flows out through the opening where the wound cannot heal; but nevertheless, keep pulling it with tweezers until you have pulled it in pieces; and when you have finished your work, apply incense, aloe, and dragon's blood to the wound, then press upon it, and place a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, over the abscess to soothe the hot inflammation; then resew the wound on his neck, and do not loosen the bandage for three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, wash the area well with oil and water, then treat the wound with thin ointment and thick ointment until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if hot abscesses and corrosions of blood in the bladder occur, and urine is retained because of it, in such a way that it passes out with the urine: then thrust your finger into the wound and draw out the blood, for if any remains, the bladder will be damaged and ruptured; then wash the wound with water and vinegar and celery, and treat him in every way you know how until he is healed; and it is necessary that on every day you treat him, to tie his two thighs together, and assemble the remedies over the wound.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is in the passage of the penis, and stuck in, and the urine cannot come out; then the treatment of what I say below, that you cut it many times, is an excuse for cutting through this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have tried this myself.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take a piece of iron according to this form and let it be filed into three angles:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the penis under the stone so that it cannot return to the bladder; then push the awl into the penis gently until it reaches the stone; then turn the awl in your hand inside the stone little by little, until you pierce the stone from another side; then urine will come out immediately, after which press your hand on what is left of the stone that is inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is broken immediately and comes out with the urine and the patient is healed; but if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie a thread under the stone and another one above it, then make an incision in the penis where the stone is between the two threads, then pull it out, and untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood in the wound; and treat it until it heals.
de la piere des femmes	of women's stones
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It sometimes happens that a stone becomes lodged in women, and if it does, the cure is difficult, and is forbidden for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; the second is that one cannot find a skilled woman who will submit to examination, especially if she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman who is well skilled in this art of medicine; and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman is more deeply embedded than that of a man, so it needs to be cut deeper, and there is great fear associated with it. And if necessity arises, one should take a very knowledgeable midwife, and with difficulty persuade her, and if one cannot persuade her, then one must use a very subtle kind of mirror; and show a wise midwife the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command from the inquiry into the stone; and look very carefully to see if the woman is a virgin. Then she should press her finger into the urethra and search for the stone; and if she finds it, she should hold it under her finger, and recommend that she press her finger or the affected area, and squeeze and press her left hand on the bladder firmly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If you find it, then you should move it from the bladder entrance to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then press on the stone at the root of the thigh towards the middle where the testicles are, feeling for the stone in that area; do not move your finger above or below the stone, and make the incision small at first; then open the wound if you feel the stone has been cut so that it can come out, and know that there are many types of stones: some are small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and some have veins.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	[You should] know their appearances in order to identify the exit.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood flows, then apply ground vitriol and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your task, so that the stone may come out, and have the tools I mentioned for extracting the stone ready at hand to aid you in your work; and if the blood flows and it is from an artery that has been cut, then apply the powder to the wound and use bandages and binding, and do not re-open the wound, and leave the stone and do not extract it, lest the patient die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the place has healed, return to your work until the stone is out.
de hernie carnouse	of fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Rupture of the waters is nothing else but an assembly of moisture or white phlegm, which is under the heart of the eggs, and is called "phlegm", and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, so that one believes it to be another egg; and it is the skin of the egg between the white phlegm that we have mentioned; and this does not happen often.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this humor is from weakness that comes to the testicles, and this matter is spread.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture has many colors; it is a yellow tinge, or red-free, or black, or watery white, and so on; and these are the signs by which one can recognize this assembly, for if it is in the white syphilis that we have mentioned, there are abscesses, a little long like the shape of an egg, and it does not open the testicles, because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the skin itself, then the abscesses are open with part of an egg, and therefore one thinks it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white syphilis, it feels good. Therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, test throughout the entire area, for its shape is as described above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, then, what comes after the introduction, judge what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, the patient should be bled according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then he should lie on his back on something slightly raised, and have lots of cushions placed under him; then he should sit up on his left side and instruct the assistant to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs of the heart; then take the spatulum, and cut the skin of the ribs in between them from the top down to the nipple, and make the slit straight while dissecting the skin of the ribs up to the white flesh, and scrape gently according to his strength; then pierce the sac with a large hole, and draw out all the water, and then insert your fingers, and press the sac upwards; and do not touch the heart, but only the sac; cut all around it carefully, and if you do not cut it bleeding will return; and if the egg jumps out during your work, put it back in place when you have finished working on the sac; then sew together the two edges of the skin of the ribs with a single stitch, and treat the wound as you would any other until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the testicle corrupted by some other disease, then you should ligature the vessels that are suspended, fearing the escape of blood; then cut off the testicle at its suspension, and draw it out, and dress it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if pus has collected into two pockets, know that they are two abscesses; then open the other part just as you did the first, equally, then wash away the blood and put in the wound soft lamb's wool moistened with rose oil; and put over the other soft lamb's wool moistened with wine and oil, and place it over the two abscesses, and place over that doubled linen and tie it up over all along its length following this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two pieces of linen and stuff them with lamb's wool according to this model and sew them together along the crotch of the breeches, and one end press against the anus up to the back, and the other end at the buttock; and let the other two ends press upon the two armpits, and have all of it bound together tightly in the loop of the breeches; and sometimes this abscess is treated with cautery in place of cutting with iron, and what you do is take a very thin knife-like cautery and open up the skin over the abscesses, and when the white pus is exposed, take the cautery according to this form and pierce that abscess at its joints and scorch it with this hot cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And cut in all ways that you can, until you reach the bone; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is safer; and be mindful of blood flow, and changes in the wound; and if nothing makes it contrary, or an abscess or blood flow or anything else, then cure what makes it contrary, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this treatment because of its horror, then administer perforation as I have told you, and when you are certain by the signs that we have said that the water has drained, then have the patient sit on a high seat; then pierce the abscess in the lower part all the way to the spine, and place the perforation near the spine; and make the holes large so that all the fluid flows out; then put cotton over the wound and bandage it, and leave it for the remaining fluid to drain, then treat the wound until it heals; and if the white membrane does not allow the fluid to flow out of the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a feather or the instrument used to treat the fluid in hydrophobic patients, whose form is described earlier; and widen the wound, and know that the fluid will return and be reabsorbed after six months or so, and when it has been reabsorbed as before, the patient will recover.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the treatment of this disease there are many complications, because of which I think it is better to leave it alone. And I will tell you about the treatment and the appearance of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come in the body, especially in the groin; and it is by many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to be understood as resulting from an excess of acidity and ague, which is spread to the testicles, or from a blow; and the color of the abscess follows the color of the body; and there is no pain, and it is a serious abscess; and sometimes there are small, dark, and bloody abscesses, with a pus-like color, and occasionally they result from a burst artery, or inflammation of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from a burst artery, it is recognized by the hot disposition of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and you must not touch it.Quant li color d’aposteme est sanglant et vermeil, et par aventure est selonc la color de la fleure qu’il est venuz, ou selonc la color del corps; et est li malais grant dolor, et li membres est mal figurez: si convint que tu fasses incision sus aposteme.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Those who are affected by inflammation of the vein are known by their appearance and the touch of the fingers; anyone can then make a diagnosis based on this, and on other symptoms. You should feel for the pulse in the scrotum, then the testicles will be drawn up, and the white sac will be protruded, and the suspensory ligament released from all parts of the testicle.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the testicle has become soft due to these symptoms, then you should draw it out and feel for its shape; if there is hernia in the sac, or within the vessels, then you must release all of that tendon and feel around it carefully.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the growth is in the rear location, then you must scrape all of it, and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is finished, then treat the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is a type of abscess wrapped in a wrapper similar to a grape, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient suffers greatly when he moves; and the cure for this disease is also very dangerous, just like the one before, and yet we will tell you about its treatment according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a raised seat, then tie the suspender of the testicles below your fingers, to all the vessels that are close to the penis, and stretch them properly; then cut through the spatumile at a wide angle in the center of the vessels, so that they are exposed, and then cut from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries in the temples; then insert a needle where there is a double thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein appeared, and tie it directly to the other end; then pull them gently according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisture; then cure the wound as with the others by bandaging tightly, so that any vessel that supplies blood to one of the testicles is cut off; for no harm comes from this, and if blood reaches all the vessels, then the testicles should be tied at all the vessels, so that the ureter loses its nourishment due to the cutting of the vessels, and dries up and cannot function.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rot of the sinus
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The causes of this hernia are either from the rupture occurring in the scrotum, or from the protrusion in the abdomen in the region of the groin, causing the intestines to descend from that opening towards one of the testicles; and this opening occurs either in the scrotum, or from the protrusion, and these two types of hernias arise from many causes: either from a blow, or from leaping, or from straining, or from lifting a heavy load, and from similar activities. The sign that it is from a protrusion in the scrotum is that it occurs slowly over a long period of time, and does not appear suddenly; and the hernia is even throughout, because the scrotum presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs of sciatica are that it brings on sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear in different places under the skin, and this is for the exit of the intestines and the body to release the sciatica.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the nerves go with the intestines, and are retained inside, and cause great pain for the patient, especially when they are pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments with iron, one must avoid fear.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the method of treatment is that you instruct the patient to draw up the intestines inside with his hand through the opening, if he can; then have him lean forward, and hold his buttocks between your hands, and lift the scrotum upwards towards your chest; then press on the abdomen above it, and hold the skin of the testicles with your thumb and index finger, and cut around the scrotum as much as you need in order to open the hernia; then scrape away at the scrotum until the tough white membrane underneath is exposed all around; then insert your index finger into the opening behind the testicle, between the white membrane which is under the skin of the testicle and between the second membrane, and separate what is behind the testicle, and between the second membrane; and move your right hand inside the scrotum, and hold the white membrane upwards with your left hand, and lift the testicle up towards the abdomen as far as you can, and instruct an assistant to push the testicle upwards; then feel around with your fingers to see if there is any intestine wrapped around the tough white membrane, and if you find anything, pull it back into the abdomen; then take a needle with a thick thread made of 10 strands, and insert it through the back part of the scrotum, behind the testicle; then hold on to the threads with your fingers, so that there are 4 threads; then tie them together in the shape of a cross, and tightly bind the hernia with two strong knots on either side, so that none of the vessels which nourish it can enter and cause inflammation; then put the thread back into the abdomen according to the first long thread, and after these two knots leave an opening in the scrotum behind the testicle as large as a finger; and after all this, cut around the part underneath the skin of the testicles, so that the blood flows, as we have said before; then apply moistened wool to the wound, and tie up the hernia with the thread which we mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white syphilis that we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of blood flow.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and let the wound bleed until it is clean; and if it is slow to bleed, use warm water, and apply what we have said, until it bleeds; then heal the wound with another remedy, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this remedy, I have never seen anyone dare to use fire to perform the cure.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients say that it is made like the thread which is joined to the vis, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after cutting above slightly towards the bottom; then compress with a bandage, and heal the abscess with what works, until the vessels close; and heal it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes the rut comes out with the veins, as we have said, and opens the place; and no intestines come out into the bowels, and if any do come out, it is a little, and it repairs all hours; and even if it remains too long in this condition, the wound swells, so that the syphilis which is in the veins extends, as we have said, for it is stretched, then becomes soft and swollen and open; and its cure is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is cured by iron in this way: and let the patient lie on his back between your hands, then compress the area of the rut swollen with salt according to the quantity of three ounces; then extract the syphilis which is under the skin that sweats, then take the thread and place it over the visible area of the syphilis; and press it towards the depth of the abdomen, then tie the two visible areas of the syphilis on the thread, and tie one and the other; then extract the head of the thread, and do not compress or extend the syphilis or anything else, as I have told you in the cure of the rupture of the intestines; then heal it with the remedy for wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, clean and treat the wound until it heals.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The syphilis is constrained, and has no appearance in the rut, and the cautery is mucous in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the scrotum
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the scrotum becomes soft in some men due to the testicles within becoming softened, and it is milky white in appearance. When one wishes to treat this condition, they should make the patient lie on his back, and then cut the soft skin on top of the tunica vaginalis; next, bring the two edges of the wound together and stitch them shut with 3 or 4 stitches; then lance between the stitches and dress the wound as one would any other, until it is healed.
dou chastrement	of chastity
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	You should know that castration is forbidden in our law, and for this reason I would prefer not to mention it in this book. However, knowledge of it is necessary for two reasons: the first is so that physicians can respond knowledgeably when asked about it, and know how to perform the procedure; the second is because we often need to castrate certain animals to aid us, such as bulls, rams, goats, and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say then that castration is performed in two ways: either by pulling, or by cutting.Si tu veels faire atraction, prends un filz d’asne selonc la grosseur de la testor et mets le en la fente; puis tire li filz par dessus tant qu’il rompt.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the type of castration that we perform by pulling, we have the animal sit in warm water until the testicles are softened and hanging loosely; then you squeeze them with your hand until they come off and you no longer feel them.Por la fendure, prends un cousteau a ta main et fends li coion en deux, tant que tu romps li corat qui est dedenz; puis tire les testors quant tu vuoies.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Of the castration of the loin: you should hold the animal steady, and squeeze the skin of its testicles in your left hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and beat each testicle with a stick once you have beaten them well; and leave some pus and the fine pus that is under the vessels; and this method of castration is better than that done by pulling, because when pulled, something of the testicles may remain, causing the animal to desire lust; then treat the wound until it heals.
des hermofrodites	Here is the text translated into modern English:
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways in males: one is that between the testicles there appears a woman-like shape, with hair, and sometimes it discharges urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way occurs in women, having on her groin a penis and testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment of men and women is that you treat the genitals just like other wounds; in the second method, for men whose urine passes through the skin of their scrotums, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the testicle
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	A tentigen is an ajosted wound above the natural part, so that it is too ugly to look at; and some women have them as large as a hand, and that is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	You should dye the excess of the tentigen with your hand or a knife, and then scrape it gently; and do not go too deep, lest bleeding occur, and then treat it with another treatment until it is healed; and for another wound that occurs at the mouth of the urethra, use cow's dung, and perhaps it will come out, and it is like the appearance of a pimple, and so they call it the "cow disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you need to treat it, as we have said before, treat the wound until it is healed.
de erratique	of the erratic pulse
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	It is erratic when the nature of the woman is not understood, or the opening is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental due to illness that comes to it; or it is caused by a sharp instrument, or a thin or thick syringe, and it is made profound in the sea, or on land, or below; and they must understand conception and childbirth, and perhaps flowers to possess; and the knowledge of this is through the consideration of the midwife.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the tumors are visible nearby, then you can reach them with your fingers or a stick.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is from a thin syringe, and it is nearby the lips, then you can treat it thus: place your index fingers together, and let the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then form the lips, so that the thin syringe is pierced, and cover the tumor; then take wool, moisten it in oil, and place it on the site, and let the woman rest at home every day, so that it may not close up.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the syphilis is hard and dense, then you must cut it with a spatule similar to a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is fresh, suspend it and cut it; and have blood-stopping medicines such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, and egg white; then apply a wide piece of cotton so that the wound does not close; and let it be for a long time, and apply a linen bandage; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when there is fresh flesh in the wound, it must be cut in this way, unless it is an abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Because one should not touch an abscess that is in a wound.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins from which blood flows habitually, and when hemorrhoids are old they become gangrenous; and we have already described their appearances in the section on diseases of the anus, and I will now describe those that can be cured.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and the testicles, when they are completely inside the anus, and do not appear on examination, are not cured by an iron cautery.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those which are at the mouth of the anus, which one can feel, are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore you must put the woman in a cold room, then pull out the hemorrhoids with tweezers and cut off their roots, then powder them with medicines that constrict blood vessels, such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense; then bind her feet to the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if there is a flow of blood, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and galls and similar things, then take barley flour and mix it with honey and garlic, and make a poultice from this and apply it to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it is stopped up, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, then make him breathe through a tube in the back and on the breasts without bleeding; then take a cloth, soak it in plantain juice or dogwood juice with old wine, and apply it to the affected area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has burst, then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red and looks like rough leather, so cover it as I have said before; and then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses in the anus
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscess come in the genitals, such as sores and perianal abscesses and herpes and cysts and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases which I have described in the classification.Quant li sang est en l’herberie et ne peut adont être tire par veine, si covient il que tu li fai une incision sus la piere; car par celi le sang sortira, et apaisera li mal.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary that I speak in this treatise of the hot abscess which comes in the stomach, which is not one of those which collect in the bowels; and if you wish to know the treatment for iron, then look to see whether the abscesses are soft at the beginning of their appearance, and full of heat and fever, and whether they turn red when you can see them.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore do not rush to pierce it, but let it be measured as long as the pain is relieved; and then let the patient sit on a seat, and have two small seats on which he can lean, and support his back, and bring his feet together at the sides of his legs; and let his thighs be spread out, and place his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good rope; then suck the navel towards the right side, and administer the instrument to open the mouth of the stomach, from which the form then comes; and it is necessary that when you see this instrument being administered, that you insert the rod first to know the depth of the wound, so that what enters with the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not hurt the patient; and if the instrument is larger, then cover the depth of the wound with cloth so that the instrument does not hurt him; and he must place the funnel of the instrument at the top, and hold the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess is opened and they are made soft in the hand, then it is necessary to cover with the head of the spatumile; and when the bowels are emptied, you should put into the wound moist tents in rose oil, or in dry green oil; and put the tent beyond the wound at the bottom of the injury, and put by pressure on the injury and on the little finger a clean linen moistened in water or mallows cooked; then cure after two days of ointment occurring to this, until it is healed; and sometimes lift the injury and the wound by enema of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lilies and aristologus cooked for a long time; then return to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is wrapped in the injury, it is necessary that you beware of cooking with iron, but cure as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	It is necessary for the midwife to first understand the natural process of childbirth and its signs: when you see the woman push downward and desire to smell a rose, then hasten the child's emergence; thus you will know that this childbirth is following the natural course, with the baby emerging head first, and the placenta following; and when you see these signs, gently press her belly so that the child is born promptly. For when the baby emerges head-first, the placenta follows, and the mother's excesses are cleansed through proper purification; and this is how it should be for a natural birth. But if it happens otherwise, it is not natural.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	Sometimes the baby emerges feet-first, or head-first but turned to the side, or by the arms or hips; it may also emerge from the stomach or armpits. If the baby is born in an abnormal position, the midwife must be wise and skilled in these matters, cautious of error and deception, and I will show you how to assist in all such cases.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes headfirst through a natural birth, and the woman gives birth painfully, and her vitality is weak, then make her sit on a stool or have other women hold her up; and anoint her private parts with oil or fried fenugreek, and then the midwife should insert a little spatulum (as described below) into her:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and split the afterbirth, and press on its nail until the moisture that is within flows out; and squeeze the woman's belly so that the child descends, and if it does not descend, then the woman should be enema with a mixture of fenugreek and sesame oil; then make her sneeze and cough up phlegm, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: then the child will come out now.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if both hands come out, then you should gently reset them a little bit at a time; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a chair, and lift her feet up; then stand the chair on the ground, and hold her so that she does not strain while standing; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child is dead, then grip the hands with the knife as mentioned above, and extract the child, and reset in the same way.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the birth of a child from its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes out from its feet, it should be pushed upwards; then it is turned little by little until it is even; then grab it by the feet and stretch it little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps up to its hips, instruct it to be grabbed, and cause it to sneeze with incense; if it leaps out, so be it by God's will.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not as we have said, then gradually return it to its natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it will be easy.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come out as we have described, take musk, tall oil, and melted gum, and grind everything in a mortar; then apply this ointment to the woman's womb, and make her sit in warm water up to her ribs; and when she is softened below, place the myrrh collar on her and let it stay for an hour; then make her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and pinch her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child will come out soon.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	the infant will emerge onto his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this way, place your hands on his head gently; then lie him on his side, with his feet hanging down, and let him lie on his back; and fold his hands gently, and then press his hands on his belly, and lift up the cushions underneath, until he is positioned downwards; and if the child does not cry out, take his feet and move him gently, then move his belly upstream, then place your hands over his mouth; and rock the child gently; and command the woman to hold on until the child emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the exit of the child who comes out of a width of one hand
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I must try to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, then make the woman stand up and walk; if she cannot walk, then let her sit on the bed, and raise her legs gently; then administer the mucilage which I have described; and if she does not give birth, then let her sit on a chair, and try to bring back the hand; and rock the child according to nature, and make her sneeze, and command her to hold on until the child emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the baby emerging from his mother's neck, and spreading out his hands, and turning his face towards his mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is necessary for the bailiff to dye his hand, then turn it slightly and slowly, and move it gently; and when it is equalized, he places on the nature of mushroom and oil, as we have said, then he commands that it moves little by little; and when you have done this, make her sit on a chair, and command her to grip; and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same way with all the membranes
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes out in this way to all the afterbirth, then grab the afterbirth with your fingernail, as long as the moisture is drained; and if the child can on his face and neck, he grabs her by the throat, so that she is not held back, and the child dies; then bottle the child inside, as long as you have placed him as it should be, and command the woman to grip several times: then he will recover gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the discharge of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	You know that twins are often born, and sometimes .iii. or .iv.; and it is not a strange thing, and it happens rarely.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	They are strange things and do not live if they are not named; I know that they are multiplied and separated by the syringe that divides them, which is attached to the udder; and sometimes they emerge as naturally as a tail, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they emerge quickly, then the midwife should act as we have said, and be quick and skillful in what she does; and act as is best for the mother's health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed inside the womb with 1, or 2, or 3, or 4, or 5, or 6, or 7, or more up to 15, and they are all shaped like children according to the measurement of the glorious sage; and the midwife should know all this because sometimes strange things happen; so act accordingly.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat a woman for a stillborn child or abdominal pain, as I said in the previous section, and there is no quick delivery, and you are forced to use manual intervention; then you should know if the woman is of sound health and has no fear of death. Then the woman should be laid on her back, with her head inclined downward and her legs raised. The midwife should apply the teats from both sides, or strap her to the bed so she does not move while delivering the child. Then grease the mouth of the mother with moist oils infused with myrrh, fenugreek, and flax seed; then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and myrrh; then gently insert them into the mother, and find the place where the child is positioned so it can descend onto its head. Then insert the teats into her own orifices: in her throat, her mouth, her palate, under her beard, near her ears, or on the sides of her neck if the descent is toward the feet; insert them into the armpit and the lower ribs if the descent is sideways. The midwife should hold the teat in her right hand and place a cord between her fingers on her left hand, and gently stroke the teat from hand to tip, then insert it into one of the orifices we have mentioned until she reaches the empty space. This is how the teats should be used:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	then pierce against the other knuckle, or the third if you need to, so that the extractions are even; and then they are even as they move from one side to another, to move out, and the knuckles are bitten to hold them in place, as is the form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if some remains, then anoint the ball of one of his fingers with oil, and press it into that part, and pull the other part; and if nothing remains, then put this knuckle or a higher place, and do this until it all comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be pulled back because of the tension, then you must wrap a cloth around it until it comes out; then press on the joint of the palm or the wrist, and so you should do with the other hand, and with the feet as well.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	If the child's head is large and constricted in the birth canal, and there is a great accumulation of fluid, you must insert the spatumile between your fingers, puncture the head, and release the fluid; or use the instrument called "almidach," with which the shape comes out along with the instruments or chapter that follows this one. In the same way, if the child naturally has a large head, then pull on the bones with forceps, and if the head pops out and is stretched by force, split it so that the fluids in the birth canal are released; and if it cannot be released, cut it into pieces as much as you can. And if the child is swollen in the abdomen or under the ribs, you must pierce it until the fluids flow out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the swelling is on his feet, and the pulse is light, and the pulse in the throat is weak.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	If the child is constricted in the abdomen or pelvis, you should stretch it with a cloth wrapped around your hand; and puncture the abdomen or pelvis so that the fluids inside flow out. If other limbs are stuck and the head remains, insert the balling instrument into the mouth of the birth canal, grab hold of the limb, and pull it out. Then, insert one or two fingers and pull the rest out. If the mouth of the birth canal is narrowed by a hot abscess that has formed there, you should not attempt to force anything in; instead, apply moist and greasy substances, and use poultices soaked in warm, softening fluids.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is on his back, and you can put him straight, then do as we have said for a living child; but if they are unable, then carry him by parts, leaving nothing of the placenta behind.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if pus comes out as we have said for abscesses that come in the womb; and if there is bleeding, then it should be stopped with a tourniquet, and other treatments should be applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose fetus had died within her belly; then another was sewn on top of it, and the other one died too.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, she developed an abscess in her armpit, which swelled up and opened, causing a foul discharge.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat her, and I thought about it for a long time, but couldn't find a way to heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I placed strong attracting plasters on her, and some bones came out, and after a few days, some more.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very amazed because there are no bones in one's belly.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought they were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I wanted to wound and put my hands in there until the woman was in a better state; and the woman lived for a long time like that, and then she suddenly died a little bit from that place; and I have not heard of this chapter being used except that when a master finds something strange, he should know how to apply a remedy.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the dislocation back into place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	After that comes the form of the pulley, which is found in books; and with two turns at each of the two shoulders.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Nevertheless, the probe should be more flexible than the restringent, and it should be made of boxwood or ebony; and the mouth of the probe should be two digits wide, and the rim of the trees should be one-and-a-half inches long; and in both sides there should be two adjustments of this same wood, which are tightened on one side and loosened on the other, half an inch long or a little more; and these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the womb to open it when you turn the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, with its appearance more subtle and lighter, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of tweezers; and has two adjustments at each end, as you see, a palm-length long, and two fingers wide; and when you see to open the wound to the whole instrument, then let the woman lie on the bed, her feet hanging down and her legs spread apart, then fit the two adjustments together in the wound, and hold the head of the instrument between her thighs; then work your hand to the whole instrument, as you have done with tweezers equally, according to the quantity that you see open the mouth of the wound, until the patient makes the face she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all surmounted, and their appearances are multiplied; and when the mirors have been prepared, the work is more swift, and men are higher for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despair over the instrument until you have prepared it, for their necessity is inexcusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the placenta is retained at childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze with some scent, and hold your hands over her mouth and nose; and if she sneezes through it, that is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, he takes a pot and makes a cover for it, and puts herbs in it that can open the mouth of the wound, such as camomile, anise, rue, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in water over fire; then he puts one end of the pot into the mouth of the wound, and the other end on the wound itself, and lets the vapors enter the wound; then he makes her sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the pus does not come out easily.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if she still has it after this treatment and it does not go away, command the midwife to moisten her left hand in oil of wormwood or in a poultice of alder, and then put it into the natural opening and seek the second membrane; and when she has found it, she should seize it and stretch it gently little by little, so that the wound is not damaged during extraction; but it must be moved slightly from side to side, and then pulled out; thus it will come out and be dislodged.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the wound is tight, we have spoken of the treatment of sneezing and fumigation with herbs; and if it is not one of all those that we have said, then beware of fooling around the anus; but you must tie what is at the mouth of the wound to the thigh of the woman, then cleanse it with a four-drug ointment; then she will defecate and urinate, and it will come out; but still, when she defecates, there comes a bad smell to the stomach and head, and the disease blights.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Then one should use suitable fumigations: some of the ancients have tried fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument used to smoke out the woman for the retention of flowers and afterbirth, if it is like this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	It is similar in appearance to a dog's head, and the narrow end is placed downward in nature, and the wide end is placed upward over the fire; and there should be fumigation over the coals, and the boil until it is wasted away, and then another one starts.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the uterus
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born with an imperforate anus; the rectum is closed by a thin membrane. Therefore, the midwife should pierce that membrane with her finger, and not with a sharp instrument, and she must be careful not to touch it with her nails; then she should apply warm milk mixed with wine and oil, and treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will close up again, put a piece of wood in the opening and leave it for a few days, then remove it when the child wants to go into the chamber.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this swelling comes suddenly from a wound or an abscess; then one must cover it suddenly: and it should be treated as we have said about the cane of splint.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the fundament
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that originate below the anus are caused by nodules, and grow larger as they approach the anus, or in between its two halves, there may be one or more fistulas; and when this nodule is old, it opens, and usually emits a white moist discharge or a thin fluid, and sometimes these fistulas are suppurating; they are caused by what comes out through the anus or rectum, or by flatulence when the patient expels gas, and occasionally a worm may come out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if they have ulcers that pierce up to the bladder and halfway down the shaft of the penis; and they reach as far as the hip joint and the base of the scrotum.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows the fistula piercing in the anus, and not at all piercing: and it is that you push your index finger into the anus, and push a thin needle of bronze or iron into the fistula when there is no twistiness.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is twistiness, push in a slender tent of lead or horsehair until you feel the tent with your finger; and if you do not feel it, and no pus or wind or ver comes out as we have said, know that it does not pierce; then be quick about cleaning it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula has pierced as far as the bladder or the passage of urine, and urine escapes, and it cannot be stopped by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it pierces as far as the joint of the thigh, then the tent comes out as far as the spot; if there is no twistiness and the pain is throughout the surrounding area, then it will immediately go away, and ointments are of no use; in these piercing fistulas there is no cure other than labor, and vanity of foolish remedies that interfere.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In one who is neither very young nor old, there is hope of recovery by cauterization with fire, as I have experienced, and the patient lies on his back between your hands; you lift his legs up to his thighs, and have his thighs bent towards his belly; then you insert a tent made of bronze, or of lead if there is any tortuosity, as far as you know where the tent goes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain around his anus, then you must insert your index finger, unless of course the tent has already pierced him; and it should be uncovered where between your finger and the patient you feel either the sigmoid colon or the rectum, thus indicating that it is perforate; one should not operate on such a patient.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	Nevertheless, one can sometimes heal some people, but this seldom happens; and the treatment that helps is to heat the cautery subtilely according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before; then insert it hot into the fistula all the way out through the anus, and do this two or three times until you know that the charred flesh, which looks like an owl's feather, has come away; then treat with moist tents soaked in butter, until those chars come out; then treat with ointment, binding flesh to flesh.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus healed, that is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it does not heal thus; and the fistula enters and does not pierce to the depth which is in the foundation, and there is between your finger and the tent a thick covering of flesh or syphac, and you see the fistula continuing below the covering of the skin; then cut it open at the beginning of the fistula, and squeeze gently towards the tent, and then cauterize afterwards, until it reaches the top of the tent; and the tent will be delivered, and will fall out; then remove those scarred tissues that look like a bird's feather, and nothing will remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the vein bleeds, and the blood flows between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or with a medication.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cautery draws together two things: that is, it burns those scarred tissues, and draws out blood and dries up moisture; then treat tents moistened with butter or crushed substances, until the place bleeds, and the burned flesh comes away in the bleeding; then treat the wound with ointments of hardening agents over dry flesh, and these are the remedies that are dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes from the depths of the fundament, and is separated from the body, put in two fingers or the fundaments, and investigate it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and within it is the membrane or sac, or it is ready to burst, then do not go too deep that you damage the underlying structure, and let the discharge happen naturally; then treat it as we have said; perhaps it will heal, or remove the covering and clean it once it has been cut away from the underlying structure, either by tent or another pointed instrument; then cleanse the wounded tissue as best you can; then work on healing the wound and keeping the fistula in the area outside the underlying structure. Thus the patient will be relieved of the discomfort.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes there are fistulas according to this manner: and when you pierce the tent in the fistula, and it is on the side of the underlying structure near the skin, then take a tent pierced at the tip according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And insert a twisted thread into both, and insert the tent all along the thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is piercing in the margin of the fundament inside, then pull out the thread of that hole, as you would push your finger into the fundament; and pull the head of the thread, and bring the two heads together, and tighten them against each other, and leave it for one or two days; and sometimes restrain it, until the threads cut through the flesh that is between two; then cure the wound until it is sewn up and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not burst, then have it burst in every way you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For one must not bandage a wound that is so deep, but rather heal it, as we have said, until it is clean.Et s’ele est em parfont, si covient le lacement coper, et puis le cure, s’ele est em parfont, tant qu’il soit sanez.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spathumile spiny, from which one makes the fistula, is very sharp on one side and smooth on the other; and one should not cut into that which one should not cut into, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids occur in two ways: either they are inside the fundament, like grains of resin, and there can be small or large ones, and they ooze blood, and there can be one or more, and they protrude outside the fundament and at the top of the fundament; but those which protrude have less moisture, and still ooze a little bit of aqueous humor or a little blood, and they are the color of the body. The treatment for those who have them inside the fundament is that you instruct the patient to straining to defecate until the fundament opens and the threads become visible; then hurry and grab it with your fingernail or tweezers, and cut it at its roots; if the tweezers cannot hold them because of moisture, take them with a piece of cloth, or cotton, or from a piece of camel's hair; pull them out with your fingers, then cut them, and dust them with hot powder that is used as cauterization; or cauterize them as it is described in the chapter on cauterization, then cure them with other cures until they are healed, and fear incision with iron. If the fundament cannot protrude, then cleanse the patient with a strong and harsh enema to wash away whatever is inside the fundament so that it can protrude freely; when the patient strains, and if the threads have come out of the fundament, then the cure is easy. You grab them with your fingernail or tweezers, cut them, then cure them as we have said, until they are healed and fear incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you must use stitching, do it in this way: take a twisted thread and put it through a needle, then pull the thread through from the top and push the needle through from the other side; bring both ends of the thread under the needle, and let them hang loosely; then tighten the thread, tie a knot, and remove the needle; do this for all the others, and leave one to drain away any excess blood; then put a damp cloth, moistened with rose oil or cerate, over the wound, and instruct the patient to rest; then let him stay like that until he feels better, and once he is healed, treat the wound with ointment and other remedies.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	drying from the heat or moisture of the bowels
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Drying of the bowels often occurs in the intestines due to natural constriction and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you must cut away at the edge of a wound with a sharp object or your fingernail so that it does not become moist, then treat it until it is dry and healed as it should be; if it cannot heal, then repeat the cutting more aggressively than before, until it heals fully and is scarred; then treat it until it is completely healed.
dou fremit	where it trembles
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Ant is a small appearance formed under the body, and goes very deep; and sometimes the frost bites it, and they feel it like death trembling, and it comes throughout the body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a candle made of goose fat, or a very strong vulture feather, and put this candle on the trembling, until the purple circle encloses the trembling all around; then turn your hand all around the candle, pressing all around the trembling, and push it deep down, and pull out the trembling by its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make a needle of bronze or iron according to this form, and let it be slender beneath and broad above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you wish, cauterize the wound, as it is before the chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes an enema is made of silver or brass, or molten copper or lead; and sometimes it is made with these small and large instruments, according to which they are made for someone.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those who are administered treatment for children and those who are feeble and in pain are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the small and large enema is above wide, where the bellies are tied according to this way:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and there is a detachment where the belly is tied, as you see, and the anus is inside, pierced; and it has two openings on one side, and one on the other; and the belly is like a bag in which one puts medicines made of a beast's bladder or parchment, pierced all around with small holes, with an inch of space between each hole, then weave a strong thread wound around in an X or in a spiral all around, and assemble the belly so that it is like a goat; and when the medicine is inside, attach it to the instrument with a strong thread, then enema; and this is the shape of the ring:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	Let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head with oil or egg white, or a similar substance, then insert it gently; then the minister squeezes his two hands together, as much as he can, then pull out the syringe, and let the patient lie on his side, and if the medicine wants to come out, let him hold it in as long as he can; and if he sleeps for a night, that is a great help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you enema him for an illness of diarrhea, and the medicine wants to come out quickly, do it again until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are in the rectum or anus, let the syringe be as fine as for a child; and that is the way to make the thin syringe that pulls the skin:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already discussed in the division the cure of wounds; now we will tell you about the cures with hands and medicine, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and depending on the location and the cause of the wound.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by the impact of a stone, and cutting with a sword or knife, or lance, or staff, or arrow, or similar objects; or they are made according to the places in the body, such as a wound that bleeds from the neck, or head, or leg, or belly, or liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and begin with simple wounds of the head, for the memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, one should take care if it is from a stone or similar object, and the skin is still broken and the wound is large, and you quickly doubt a hot abscess: then make it bleed with the cephalic vein immediately if there is a little blood coming from the wound, and let the bleeding be in the opposite direction of the injured part; and let the patient avoid fullness of wine and rich foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to bleed, then let his food be diminished, and do not drink wine or eat meat; and put on the wound, if hot abscesses come out, cotton wet only in rose oil, or in strictive wine; and if there is no hot abscess, then put on the wound, as long as it has all its blood, and it has not been moved by the air, powder, which I will speak of shortly; and if the fire has moved it, then put on some ointments until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like that of a sword-cut and similar, and the lips cannot be approximated with tenting, then approximate them with suturing, as I will say for abdominal wounds, from the ribs up.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to bone, and it can be closed, and holds only by a little, then cover it; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as testicles and cooked wheat, as well as meat, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find pus in the skin, and it is not attached to the bone, then open it all the way, and let it drain out, then cure it; and if there is a vein in the wound or vein, which does not clot, and cannot be stanched by medicine, then tie off the vein, and if that does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is easy: you should apply this powder that heals as soon as the burn occurs.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is as follows: take one part incense; two parts dragon's blood; three parts quicklime, and mix the powder finely, and apply it to the wound, and hold it firmly in place until it heals well and joins to all its blood; and then bind it up tightly, and leave it without loosening, if it is not swollen; for the medicine is not removed until it has healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one makes this from quicklime only, when one does not have the incense or dragon's blood, but the fire should open the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound has been moved by the fire, let it be in the same state, and do not apply any of this powder to it; but apply some digestive ointments, or a poultice made from barley flour with water and honey, until it oozes; then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if there is a fracture of bone with the wound, and it is small, I will extract it with delicate tweezers; and I will tell you about fractures of the skull later.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound on the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and the one on the head, except that the nerves or arteries of the neck are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is a nerve, there is nothing else to do but leave the wound untreated and apply no restraining agent, for it harms the nerves and makes them withdraw; and apply nothing cold to the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation within is with the brain, which is the highest member; but use warm remedies, such as a wash in lukewarm water, and mixed with rose oil, and cooked wash also in lukewarm water, and other minerals according to this method, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then cut it and ligature it, and then treat it until it is healed.Et si li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and it is chapped and full of pus, then pierce it or a lower place; and if the artery is cut, and bleeding ensues, then ligate it, and cauterize it if necessary; and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the windpipe, and the passage for food is blocked, then cut the windpipe above the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then bind it firmly, and leave it for several days, then treat with ointments that promote sloughing until it is healed; and if the wound has affected the bone, then trepan it; and if there are pieces of bone, remove them all if you can, and those you cannot reach, then leave them until the wound granulates and the wound is closed; and if the wound is fresh, then apply the powder I described earlier.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of a wound from a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a stab wound from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then examine whether blood issues from the wound except for wind-like breath: then you know that the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, then do not put the powder on it in the first hour, nor bind it up because of the blood that seeps out, but let it return to the body, and heal the patient. But apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day; and if you do not have an ointment, then place old cotton in the wound to soak up moisture, and let the patient sleep with his head on the wound for three, or four, or more days; then no spasms, nor bad tremors of the body, nor strangulations of breath will come. And when you see good signs, then you know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat it therefore with poultices and other remedies until it is healed; and if it will not heal, and keeps weeping, then know that there is a fistula; treat it then as it should be treated.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife, and it is simple, in the front or back, treat it as we have said before; if it is large, stitch it; and if it is small, powder it, and if it has bitten into the bone, and there are pieces loose, then clean out the wound, and draw out the pieces if they are loose; and for other wounds in other limbs, judge as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	the rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	There are great, medium, and small ruptures of the belly; from a large wound sometimes the intestine or the nerves of the intestines protrude, by which there is an entrance for air; and the suturing is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one, because when one sews up the intestines little by little, they swell as soon as they feel the cold, so that they are more easily sewn little by little; and thus it is better to treat a smaller wound, because one sews up the intestine gradually to its place rather than all at once. And know that there are four kinds of ruptures of the belly: two kinds of common suturing occur in the suturing of the belly, and two other kinds of proper suturing are common to other wounds; and yet they are more proper for the suturing of the belly, and I will explain each one.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and something from the intestines has come out, and a greased cloth is used to push it back in, this can be done in one of two ways: either because of the size of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this way: moisten a sponge or soft cloth in lukewarm water, or cook it in squinant and cypress and spurge, and apply the intestines until the swelling is reduced; and sometimes this wine-based compress helps, and it is necessary to use it repeatedly to reduce the swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling subsiding, moisten the intestines with water or warm tea made from mallows, because a little constriction causes the entrance to close slightly; and if it cannot be pushed in, make a small incision in the instrument used to treat hemorrhoids; and the first treatment is better than cutting, which should only be done in case of great necessity; and the instrument for splitting it is described as follows: cut into the curve and remove it, and see the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines leap out, then put them back in according to their natural shape in their proper place, if you have the power, for this is best.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is low on the belly, you should make the patient lie on his back with his legs above his head; and if it is high up, then put the head and feet higher than the lower parts, and also if the rupture is on one side, then have the wounded part highest. And thus you should arrange things as I say, in both large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, use what you have available, then take a needle in your hand and press the edges of the wound together; this is the common method of suturing, and it involves piercing both sides of the skin and the subcutaneous tissue underneath with one or more needles, depending on the size of the wound, leaving a small gap at the top, then passing the needle through all four edges of the wound, pulling them together; then tie off the thread around the needle, and repeat this process according to how many needles you need, ensuring they are not too deep in the flesh or skin, so as not to reopen the wound; then tie off the threads so that they do not bother the patient when sleeping, and place tents or bandages over the needles to keep them in place until the wound heals. This method of suturing with needles is best for small wounds, as a larger one will require a different approach: take a needle and thread, pierce all four edges of the wound, pulling them together; then bring the needle back to where you started, in the manner of sewing a garment, leaving a gap between each stitch equal to half a finger's width; this method healed a man who had been stabbed in the belly, with his intestines hanging out, and the wound was more than a palm wide, and the intestines protruded by more than two palms.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned his intestines after they had been out for 24 hours, and the wound was sewn up for 15 days, and I treated it, and he recovered.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And they had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I didn't treat him with ointment, because I was in a place where there was neither ointment nor medicine; and I put old cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with water of honey until he recovered.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you the two proper ways of sewing: take the needle and insert it from the outside through to the inside; when it has pierced right through from one side to the other, hold the thread at the exit point where you inserted the needle, and pierce through from the other side of the wound to the outside; the understanding of this sewing is that you sew just as the furriers do furs, and you leave one end of the thread on one side, and pick it up on the other, so that the sewing is completed all around.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of suturing, which Galen describes correctly, is as follows: take two pieces of skin and join them together naturally, applying one edge of the flap to the other, like so: insert a needle into the proximal edge of the flap, and pierce only that spot, leaving the two edges of the flap; then turn the needle and pierce from the outside in, through both edges of the flap, until you reach the inside; next, pierce one and then the other side of the flap from the outside in, through two other edges of the skin that are on the opposite side; this is the most common and proper method of suturing.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen says this, and some testify to it: one should sew the abdomen with two needles, with thread in each; and one should push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew wounds; and know that when the incision is on the abdomen, the suturing is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgments of the wound are like the judgments of other wounds: and it is that when you find the fresh wound all its blood, as long as the burn has moved, it puts back the bowels, and the envelope; then put on the powder char, and if the burn has moved, put on some ointment that is present, until the wound heals; and cut the thread, and sew up the edges, and the mirror; then cure the wound like the others, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicine, as soon as it begins to heal, place old cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you do not need any other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound will cause community to the principal members, then you should moisten a light cloth in tempered warm oil, or in rose oil, and place it around the angles, and under the armpits; and if there is pain or swelling in the bowels, which often happens, then enema with warm black wine, and likewise if the swelling comes up to the intestines; and pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines, which are called "young," cannot heal when they are raw, and this is due to the thinness of the veins that they are made of, and the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of their nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the gallbladder pops out of the wound, put it back in like the intestines, as long as it's fresh; but if it's old and has become green or black, you should tie off the area that is black so that no blood flow comes from it, for there are veins and arteries there; then cut away what is between the ligature, and hang the two ends of the wound down to drain and facilitate extraction when the gallbladder breaks, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	of the thread
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestines are ruptured, and the wound is small, one can sometimes restore it in some people, for I saw a man who was pierced in the belly by a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and from it came digestion and flatulence; I applied a cautery according to what I could, and did not cease to cauterize until he was healed, and the wounds closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him sewing, I doubted that the patient had a problem in his belly; and he had no harm, but remained in better condition, eating and drinking; and some experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it should be bound in such a way: take a thread from a great testicle, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the thread has opened the mouth, put it on both lips so that it tightens his mouth; and then he covers the head, and it is held so that it cannot come undone, then put another thread after in the same way as before, until the wound is completely closed; and heal the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If these wounds are in the intestines and no harm comes to the patient, one can sew up the intestines with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal, in the following way: take the end of this intestinal thread that is very thin, then tie it to the end of a fine linen thread which is twisted, then put the thread through the needle and sew up the wound, and tie it in the opening; and this method of sewing with threads is nothing other than according to the way of hope and expectation; and if the wound is large and broad, especially when it is in one of the intestines, there is no healing or health, except by subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula, wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it wakes up, is universally called a "fistula", and especially when it is swollen and becomes pus-filled.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is according to the green node, formed from a hard and white growth, where there is no pain, and it is as swollen as the beak of a bird; sometimes it is clear and pus-filled, and sometimes thick; sometimes small, and sometimes large; I have already spoken about these in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there is no scabs, is only due to one of nine causes: namely, due to the smallness of blood or body fluids; or because of its malignancy; or because there is a hard mass within it, and on the surface, that does not allow pus to form; or because there is too much inflammation; or the location is swollen, and the matter is of poor quality; or the medicine used for treatment is ineffective; or the corruption is of a pestilential nature; or due to the natural characteristics of the region, digestion and healing are slow, and swelling occurs. Or there may be veins or bones involved: I have already described all these causes, their signs, and the medicinal cures in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now I will tell you about the treatment for a fistula that is performed manually.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	You should know that fistulas can occur in any part of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins and arteries and nerves, or from the sinus, or intestine, or bladder, or any of the ribs, or from the spine in the back, or from any joint in the hands or feet; and they can affect the primary function of a limb, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are in this way are painful to heal, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance; and if there is a fistula that does not come to the places I have described, and you have confidence in the cure, and you see it working, then take an iron or bronze tent, if the fistula is straight, then pierce it; and if the fistula is crooked, then probe with a thin, flexible rod of lead, for the lead bends with the crookiness. And if there are several openings in the fistula and you cannot probe it well with tents, then cleanse it by enema through one of the openings, for moisture will flow from one opening to another, and cleanse it; then pierce it gently as you can, so that you know whether there is bone or nerve, and feel how deep it goes; and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you press your hand, and where he feels it; and when you know for sure where it is located, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or any of the places I have mentioned to you, then treat it as I have instructed, and remove the foulness and rotten matter inside. Then cure it until it is healed, and if the fistula is very deep and straight, then you should probe deeply, as much as you can, then apply moist tents with medicinal water, and let them sit at the mouth of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes away the excess matter at the bottom; then apply healing ointments to cleanse the wound, until it is healed. If it is not healed by this method, then cauterize as we have described, and if the bone is rotten with the fistula, then treat it likewise.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If the vein or nerve in your limbs is not causing you grief, as we have said, and if there is decay and blackness in the bone, then treat it with a poultice until it is healed; and if it is not healed and swells again as before, know that you have not gone deep enough: probe and dig until you reach the bottom, and remove all the decay, then restore the joint; and if it is thus healed, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the decay is too deep for you to reach it; then do nothing but let nature take its course; and if there is a small corrupt bone, and you can pull it out with tweezers, or with an instrument suitable for this purpose, and if there are many bones, pull them all out, one by one; and if moisture causes a contrary effect, and there is no error or fear, then cut and dry, and use poultices, and release the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in one hour, then place something on the wound to cause swelling, and let it swell around the bones, and then they will become looser; and if it is a large bone, such as the leg or thigh, then cleanse only the rottenness until all the darkness is removed, and then heal the wound. And if there is a great deal of decay, and it comes down to the soft tissue of the bone, then it should be lanced and covered all the way to the decay, and then healed as it grows together. And I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you can take an example and aid from this in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	He was a young man of about 30 years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from inside the body, so that the matter came out to the leg, and it was swollen with a large abscess, and there was no reason to open it; but the doctors, through their folly, operated on it until the abscess opened, and a lot of matter flowed out, and it became a fistula, and many holes opened through which the body fluids flowed; and many doctors treated him for two years without any wisdom in the art of medicine, so that I was called to treat him. When I saw his leg and the medicines that were used on him, and what flowed from the holes into the body, it was a great illness; and the young man's skin turned red, and he had a yellow color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent at one of these openings, and then searched all the openings, and found that one came up against another throughout the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hurried therefore, and probed one of the openings until I exposed a portion of the bone, and found it rotten and piercing through, and the corruption extended to the bone within; I treated what appeared to me of the rotten bone, and thought there was no other corruption except that which I removed; and then began to heal the wound with strong medicines for a long time, but could not close it; so I began again, and exposed the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and treated it, and then removed it, and strove hard to close the wound; but was unable to do more than probe around a palm's breadth of the bone, and drew it out entirely from its socket, and then healed it with medicines; and it was cured quickly, and there was no need to resume the operation except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure it, and for the fear of death that I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For often due to the bloodletting he bled profusely, but he was completely healed, and in the bone a hard lump grew, and he had a good disposition and had no harm or contrary effect at all, neither when lying down nor when rising.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken anywhere in the body, it should be bound in this way: take a bandage, and tie it to the head of the exposed bone, and instruct someone to pull it upwards; and place another larger woolen bandage over the hard lump on top of the bone, and hold the end, so that you draw the corrupted flesh towards the bottom, and uncover the flesh above where you want to bind it, so that the bandage does not stick to the flesh; and place a hot coal or a flat stone underneath the bone to cover the corrupted flesh; and one should keep binding as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and bind again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If the bone is broken and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in part, then uncover the flesh all around; then place a fire underneath, and then cut from one side of the corruption to the other, and cut the healthy bone away from the corruption as far as it goes, as we have said; and if the corruption is at the joint, then cut through the corrupted joint and cut the bone on the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, there is no need to cut further than the joint; and if the corruption is at the knuckle of the hand or the foot, it is a very serious matter, but you must still investigate the corrosion and how it appears to you; cleanse it in every way you can, as long as the vein or nerve does not cause you any trouble; and know that there are many ways to cut these bones, depending on the position of the bones, their appearance, their thickness and thinness, their size and smallness, and their hardness. And so you must prepare an instrument for each type of task; and know that your work will show you the instrument you need, according to your knowledge of this art and the characteristics of the diseases; then choose the instrument you need according to what is appropriate.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The head can suffer damage due to internal causes or external; and when you have treated this corrosion with medicine, if it does not help, then you must cover the affected limb up to where the corrosion occurs, so that the patient escapes death by this poison or by the greater evil of losing the limb; and the signs are that the limb becomes black, as if burned by fire, and after the blackness appears, the corrosion spreads from limb to limb throughout the body. If it is caused by the sting of some venomous creature, such as a scorpion or snake, and the sting is on the head, then cover it and do not give it any opportunity to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it reaches the hand, cover it at the joint so that the corrosion does not reach the arm; and if it reaches the arm, cover it at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no remedy but to cut off the limb according to its size; and thus do with the leg also: if it reaches the first joint, cover it after the other joint; and if it reaches the foot, cover all of it; and if it goes up into the leg, cover at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to cut off the limb, or the patient will die. The way to cover the limb with a bandage is to tie it above and below, and extend one instrument down from one of the ties, and another instrument up from the other tie, and open the flesh between the two ties with a broad spatula, so that the bone is exposed; then cover it and put a linen cloth on each side, so that the bandage does not touch the healthy part, and bring the patient more injury and abscesses.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if bleeding occurs when you operate, cauterize the area gently or apply some restraining powders; then return to your treatment until it is complete, then tie the injured limb with a suitable ligature and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man one night: he had a dark discoloration that looked like a burn, and this corrosion began at the toe of his foot, spreading to cover the entire foot; and when the man saw the corrosion, he bandaged his foot, and it healed. And long after, the corrosion appeared on the finger of his hand, and he came to me, and I applied repulsive substances after cleansing his body, but I could not stop the corrosions; and he wanted me to cut off his hand, but I refused, for I had no hope that the material would be repelled; and I feared that if I cut off his hand, he would die, for the man's vitality was weak. And he despaired completely, returned to his homeland, bandaged his hand, and healed; and I have never heard of this method being used except in this case, should anyone need it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	There are times when an abscess forms in a fleshy area and remains for so long that it causes a great gathering of pus; then it ruptures and pierces, and the pus flows out, leaving a hollow space beneath the skin, just like a vessel; and the skin above is as thin as a piece of cloth, and does not heal all the way to the bone or nerve, and such a condition is called a 'sore' and not a 'fistula'; but if it extends so far that it reaches the bone, then it is called a 'fistula', and you can see right through the skin all around it, just like through a piece of cloth; and it does not heal because of its infection.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you have reason to believe that the skin is healing and the infection is not deep, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it thus: examine whether the abscess is large and the pus within has a foul odor; then prepare an Egyptian medicine as follows: take equal parts of alum, oil, and litharge, and melt them together in a vessel over fire until the mixture turns red and thickens like honey; then take some of this according to your need, and dilute it with water and honey, and inject it into the abscess, and allow it to remain for two hours before squeezing it out; repeat this several times until the abscess is completely cleaned and healed, and the pus is removed; and if you do not have the Egyptian medicine at hand, then prepare a clister of ashes from grapevines: gather some ashes and pour water over them, then strain the liquid and use it to inject into the abscess until you see that it is cleansed; and if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then use a mixture of water and honey with a little litargire ground into it; or inject a mixture of honey and wine, letting the honey work to cleanse and the wine to dry up the sore; and once this is done and you see that the abscess is cleansed, then inject something that encourages flesh growth inside it: prepare an emulsion of diaphoretic powder with rose oil and wine; or inject some medicinal ointments, as I have described in the section on ointments; and if the opening of the abscess is small and the tube of the clister cannot enter, then enlarge it with a needle and apply a tent of Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment, until it is enlarged enough for the clister to enter; and if the wound is too large, then cut away only as much as is necessary for the clister to reach the affected area, and if the opening that drains the pus is above, then apply the tent lower down.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Because when the bowels are full, you should not let any charioting ensue; and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish, then prepare in such a way that the bowels move to the lowest place they can, for when the bowels are full, you should not let any charioting ensue, and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish, then prepare in such a way: that the bowels move slightly downward, and leave nothing of the bowels; and take consolidating medicines to put over the wound, and be above the linen drape that covers the entire wound; then cover the opening of the breast more widely than before, then apply ointment on the other drape according to the quantity of the opening, and place it on the opening of the wound to draw out the bowels, and do not remove the large drape except after several days once; and that which is over the opening of the breast, remove often to draw out the bowels, and know what comes from the bowels, whether it is venom or pus or enough or digestible or indigestible; and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in such a way and you see the nature that rises on the opening of the wound, then know that the breast is healing, and approach the saints; and then loosen it in the morning, or the middle of the day, and when you loosen the wound, change the other drape, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if milk flows from the breasts for many days, know that the breast is not averted.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons spread over a long time, do not despair of your health, for health is drawing near.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	Because there are some people in whose wounds putrid flesh slowly develops, and others who develop the opposite; and if digested humors shoot from the breast after many days, know that it is not healing; and if the breast is slow to heal and far away, apply dry medicines moist in substance but dry in virtue, such as a diaphenous ointment, because there is a large part of vitriol in it, and this is the final medicine; take a diaphenous ointment, and make it with rose oil, and rose water equal in substance; then cook it down and use it; and you can also cook honey thickened with sugar when diaphenous ointments are not available, or take myrrh, aloes and incense, powder them, and spread them on the honey that I mentioned above; and if the fistula is slow to heal and does not heal with this treatment, know that the corruption has gone deep, causing an impression in the bone, or a hard spot in the limbs or viscera; then follow the fistula cure we have described earlier.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panaris is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the finger or toe, or occasionally in other places; and when it becomes infected, and no attention is paid to it, then the abscess becomes deep, and it runs and oozes pus as far as the root of the nail, and sometimes all the way around; and corrosion extends to the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the part swells, and the color turns yellow.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have described in the section, and the treatment does not help, then you must cut away all the dead tissue that remains beneath the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cautery is a great help if the bone and nail are healthy; and if the nail grows into the flesh, and begins to grow out, and the blisters, then you must put a wire under the nail so that it pulls the flesh away, and draw it upward, and carefully cut away the dead flesh, and apply ardant and corrosive medicines to remove all of it; then treat with ointments until it heals.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it out and pull it out, for as long as the bone remains corrupted, it cannot heal; and if you see that it is about to become corrupted, cut it in front of the knuckle as before described, then cure it until it is healed; and if it is swollen and pained, then you must first treat it; next, cut the nail of the sprain diagonally from above, taking care not to cut down to the flesh beneath the nail, for otherwise the patient would feel great pain; and if this happens, place something on top to soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain in the shoulder
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The nails of some people's hands grow out curved, and sometimes they have bones in them, and occasionally a claw, and in others the nail grows from the root of the joint, or from one of the knuckles.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	He who is born in the navel of the eye does not move, and he who is born at the junction of the eye sometimes moves; the size of him who is fleshy is thus light, in such a way: cut it at its root with a broad spatule.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who was born in the root of the joint is painful to cure: you must hold the cupping.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For him who is born in the back of the eye, you must first cut the flesh around the socket, then cut the bone with a convenient silk to that, then clean it until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joints that come together come by birth, or by wound, or by burn, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Then you must cut the socket so that the eye can fit back in according to their natural shapes; then put between two tents or moistened sheets in rose oil, so that they do not adhere; or put between two pieces of subtle plaster, until the sockets are adherent, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If it comes to one of his hands with the palm, then sew up that wound as it should be.
des vils	of the wicked
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Veins are large enveloped vessels filled with melancholy superfluities, which come in many parts of the body; and they occur more in legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, than in others.Et avient plusors foiz en veine perroniere, et en celle que l’on appelle artere, qui est de contree la veine sus la cheville de la jambe, ains qu’elle ne soit en leus naturelz; et plus avient a cele perroniere qu’a l’artere.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore you should administer to him some purgative medicine, and then the basil oil.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment with fire has two methods: one is to cauterize the veins and draw out the black blood; the other method is to open a vein and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The procedure for the incision is as follows: first, place a hot water compress on the leg until the large veins are dilated, then stretch out the leg from above the thigh to the area below the knee; then cut an incision in one place, or two or three places, with a broad cut, then open and draw out the black blood by hand from one end to the other, as much blood as the patient can tolerate without harm; then ligate it, and order that he eat meat mixed with black bile; and resume the evacuation and bleeding when the incisions have healed, and repeat as necessary.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The treatment of the joint is as follows: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then put it in the bath, and pour hot water on the leg until it turns red and the veins swell; and if you do not have a bath, heat it over the fire, and then cut the skin at the vein near the knee or in the part below the ankle; then open the skin around the vein, and scrape the vein from each side until it appears when touched; and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white cord; then tie it beneath with thread, so that it is raised from the skin, and then cut it gently at the knuckle, then cut another slit, or more if you need to, then lift and cut at the toe, then pull and lift up to the second slit; then draw it out from slit to slit until it is all out, then cut it off; and if you cannot pull and raise it, then tie a strong double thread to an awl, and pierce and pull it, and tie it beneath the vein, and turn your hand from side to side so that it comes out; and be careful that it does not tear, for if it tears, then one cannot pull and raise it, and harm comes to the patient; and when you have treated it all, then place soft wool soaked in wine and rose oil over the wound site, and treat it until it heals.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vein is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it crookedly, but do not cut it; and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron used to split the vein is curved and does not cut so that it does not cut the vein; and it is a large curve because if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but it should be large as we have said, and this is its shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is located in the legs, in hot areas where no herbs or trees grow, and in land with no moisture; and sometimes it grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens from porridge that comes under the skin, as snakes and worms do, lurking between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there comes a great inflammation in the leg, then change the place, and begin the vein going out, just as a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the shoulder opens, you should wrap around a piece of plaster from three and a half to four inches, and tie it, and leave the plaster hanging on the leg, and every time that there is no point in the wound, then wrap around the plaster, and tie it; and if it is too long, cut off a part, and wrap the rest, and do not cover it at its root as long as it is all coming out; for if you cover it, then it goes into the flesh, and makes an abscess and pus in the place, and a bad disease; because of this thing, it should be treated little by little to the head, and nothing remains in the body; and sometimes this vein is when it is treated from five or ten palms long, and a man came to me, to whom it came out ten palms long, and when you cover it, then plug one hole or opening, and pierce it to the bottom so that all comes out; and empty the matter which is inside, and bring medicine to the place on swelling some days, then cure it as the abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes this vein bleeds profusely, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot, or in the foot, and a lot of pus comes out, and from which it rains; therefore treat it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that arise between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called "disease of oxen" in our land because it often affects oxen. It is a small worm that arises between skin and flesh and moves throughout the body, ascending and descending, until it erupts through the skin where it travels, and jumps out. It is caused by putrid humors, just like worms, snakes, and earthworms in the belly. It is feared for its malice, because when it moves through the body and ascends to the head, it can enter and destroy the eye, which often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being cured and pulled out, one cannot help but cry out in pain when he sees it; therefore, you must tie the area above and below with a strong string tightly, then press down on it and pull it out forcefully; if the blood runs profusely into the flesh, and you cannot stop it, cauterize it with fire until it stops bleeding. The greatest harm that can occur is that it will affect the eye, as we have said before; therefore, if you see it coming close to the eye, press underneath it firmly, then pull it out; you must use remedies that cleanse the body of infectious humors and meat that promotes putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	from the pain that comes from flatulence
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called "vomiting" in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in some parts of the body and then moves from one part to another; I saw what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and uncovered her arm, and saw a small swelling on the vein of the arm; and a little later, I saw it rising up like a worm to the shoulder, faster than anything, as bright as silver when it moves from one place to another; the pain left that spot and settled in the shoulder, and then a little later ran through the whole body, until it came to the other arm; then she told me that she was turning around in the body, just as I saw her.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I wondered greatly how she moved from limb to limb, for I had never before seen this disease progress in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Nevertheless, I have seen many whose pain moved from one place to another, but I did not see it in the woman; and I thought that it was because women have dry bodies, and their veins are uncovered, and thus appears this compelled windiness; and they do not appear in this way to those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and relaxed veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see to treat this disease, and the patient feels the pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then tie it above and below tightly, and then press on it until that windiness is forced out of its place; and cauterize the area; and if you do not see it yourself, then have it treated by someone who dispels windiness, such as with foul pills, and serapin pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they land.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	There are many types of stones, some with large points, small, smooth, and pointed; and some with two angles, and some with tongues, and some are hollow; and they can break in a limb in two ways: either in a principal member like the brain, heart, liver, lung, spleen, kidney, intestine, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When she falls, therefore, in any part of these members, and the sign of death which I shall tell you about afterwards becomes apparent, then you must be wary of extracting this arrow; for death follows upon many dispositions; and when this evil sign is not apparent to you, and the arrow is not deeply imbedded, draw it out, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain is when the arrow pierces and penetrates the bone, and the membrane which covers the brain, is seen to be cut, and blood and pus flow out, and a swelling and redness appear in them, and inflammation and redness of tongue, and spasm and confusion of mind, and vomiting of blood; and perhaps also mucus flows from the nose or ears; and perhaps also they lose their speech and voice; and there issue from the wound white moisture resembling pus, and also a bruise-like discoloration; and if these signs appear to you, cease your treatment, and extract the arrow if it is not deeply imbedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The signs of a hernia when it occurs in the chest are that it is located near the left breast, and feels as if it were lodged in a hard object, not soft; and sometimes the hernia is silent like the pulse, and emits black blood, and there is a chill and cold sweat, and syncope: then know without a doubt that death is imminent.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the signs of the wound that never leave the chest are foam-filled bile coming from the wound, and a swollen throat, and the patient's colour changing, and high panting, and chilliness leaving.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow pierces the sole of the foot, it affects the small bones; and causes great swelling and great pain and sighing; and all the limbs of the shoulder are moved.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow pierces the stomach, by chance something indigestible might jump out from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow pierces the belly, and nothing comes out through the rectum but feces, then there is little hope for a cure or for extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow pierces the bladder, and urine comes out and escapes, and the patient feels great pain: know that this wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, armpit, spine of the back, forearm, thigh, and legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to various dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or artery and it is not venomous, as I will tell you so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man that an arrow hit him in the jaw at its root near the nose; I treated it, and pulled it out from under the fat of the ear, and he was healed without bleeding.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And I treated an arrow that had hit him in the fat of the eye under the eyelid, and the arrow was lodged there, and only its tip was protruding towards the nose; the arrow was as long as a Turkish bowstring, with a light iron tip, and the man was healed without any bad consequences.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And I removed an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with ears; I cut the beards, and I removed it gently until it came out, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And I removed an arrow from a man's home, which was lodged in his stomach, and I thought he would die; and after thirty days had passed, his condition did not improve; I cut above the arrow, and I probed it, and pulled it out, and he had no bad reaction.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a man with an arrow lodged in his back, and the wound is sewn up on top; and the arrow remains inside him, and his natural functions are not changed, and he finds no harm in any of his natural actions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And I saw another man who had an arrow in his face, and the wound was sewn up; and he remained like that without experiencing great pain; and many others similarly.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And I treated an arrow wound in the home of the prince the king, who had a wound in his head, and was slightly tilted to the right; and the arrow was lodged completely. I was called to tend to it after three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I probed it with a thin instrument, and did not feel anything; but he felt piercing and pain underneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I placed an astringent and digestive poultice on the site to prevent swelling; and the location of the arrow became apparent to me.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the poultice again the next day, and the wound healed quickly; but the patient felt the arrow inside his nose for a long time, and he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied a strong corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it was open and I probed it, feeling the head of the arrow that had pierced through; then, by means of this medicine, I cleared away the obstruction in the wound until the head of the arrow became visible; and the patient made a full recovery within four months. Then I cleansed the wound and, using tweezers, pulled out the arrowhead; but it would not come out, so I continued to work on it with various instruments until one day I was able to extract it with specially made tweezers, as described in this chapter, and thus healed the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And they thought that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored; so I restored it, and the wound healed up, and the patient made a full recovery.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you place your treatment on what I do not say, because books cannot encompass everything; but wise masters reason well about very few things, and about what is present and lacking to them, they devise new works and new instruments, from the descent of strange things that come in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows strike the members where they are pierced in two ways: either through the place where they enter or through another part; and those that exit through the place where they entered are arrows entering into fleshy parts, and sometimes they exit now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not exit now, then leave it as long as the flesh around it becomes putrid and the outlet is cleared; and also if it is pierced into the bone and cannot exit, then leave it for a few days, and move it every day; and then it will exit, and if it does not, then pierce through to the very tip of the arrow, making the hole around it wider, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the skull, and goes just to one of the brains, and some of the accidents that I have mentioned appear to the patient: then do not pull it out, but let it be until it is equalized after some days, for if the arrow comes to the brain, that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not lodged in the bone only, and does not come to the brain, and the patient remains for some days without a bad accident, then prepare the engine to pull it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is lodged very deeply and cannot be removed, then administer bleeding around the wound, as I have told you; then clean the wound until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is lodged in a place in the body where it cannot be seen, it should be sought throughout the body; and if it can be felt, pull it out with any convenient instrument; and if due to the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow there is no bone or nerve or vein, then cut it as much as the wound is large; and pull out the arrow if you can, and if there are ears by which it holds in the arrow, remove the flesh that is lodged on both sides as far as you can, and then break or fold the ears of the arrow so that you can pull it out; be careful not to break the arrow as you pull it out.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot at once, then leave it until around the nail it becomes soft, then pull it out, for its extraction is easy.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	If the bleeding makes you feel faint, then do as we have said about the treatment in its chapter; and beware of cutting into the nerve and opening a vein, and use the means by which you can best pull out the arrow without danger, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to how he was when the arrow struck him, for that is the greatest help, and if you cannot do that, then place him according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Arrows that come from elsewhere, or where something of it is visible, or the skin is swollen at that spot so that one can see or feel it: cut there, as far as the pincers can reach, and then pull it out; if it will not come out just now, try again later.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is stuck in the bone, rotate your hand around, as far as it goes into the bone, and widen the hole, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	If it cannot be extracted, then leave it for now and try again later; if there is still some of the arrow inside, then remove all of its shaft; if part of the arrow is broken off, and you can use a tool to grab it, then place the tip of the tool so that it enters the arrow's head; then pull it out, and if the arrowhead is lodged in the tool, then pull it out with the arrow.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is touched, then you must cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, then treat the wound as it should be.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow pierces the shoulder or the chest or belly or bladder or ribs, and it is deep, and you can cut around it, then do so; but be careful not to cut into the vein and nerve, and then pull it out, and then sutured the wound, if necessary; and treat it until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tongs used to treat arrows is similar to the beak of a bird; see the illustration:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	There are many varieties: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the head of the arrow is like the feather of a bird, to push towards the tip of the arrow, just as it is shaped:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of tweezers for pushing and gripping is like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are XXXI veins from which one recovers, and they have XVI branches in the head, namely: II veins which are behind the ears, called the "two ear-veins"; and the II arteries which are in the II temples, visible; and II veins that are in the II corners of the II eyes, called "aspiring veins"; and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two windpipes which are in the neck; and the II veins that are above the lips, and these are the veins called "age-veins"; and the II veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins from which we commonly heal are five in each arm: one is the cephalic, and is on the left side of the chest, and the common people call it 'vein of the head'; and the middle one is called 'fast', and is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and the common people call it 'vein of the heart'; and the basilic is on the right side of the chest, and the common people call it 'vein of the belly', and it is above the femoral, and is that from which we heal, which opens clearly above the groin.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the salvator is the vein between the auricular and the ring finger, and it has two branches; and in the leg and the foot there are three veins: one is below the bend of the groin on the left side of the chest, and the second is sophene, which is at the ankle on the right side of the chest; and the vein called 'nesse', which is at the ankle on the other side.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The bleeding of veins that are behind the ears is helped by old catarrhs and by emigraine; and the qualities of the bleeder, as I told you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then compress the patient's neck with a bandage so that the two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending on the head; then press them with your fingers, and where you feel the pulse under your fingers, sign there; then take the lance, and pierce under the vein all the way to the bone, then lift your hand over the entire vein upstream, and stab through the skin and the vein well twice with the lance, and make the blood come out; then compress and ligate it until it is healed; and I have already said about incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The bleeding of the two arteries that are in the two temples is useful for old migraines, and for headaches, and for habitual blindness, and for ague in the eyes; and the quality of the bleeder is as I have said: and it is that the patient holds his neck still, so that the two veins are clearly visible; and feels the pulse under your thumb, and then sign with your finger; then lift the vein at the top of your index finger, and insert the lance underneath, and lift the vein at the top, and bandage it, as you did with the other veins; then release the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it; then bind it tightly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of their binding and their release in the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The bleeding from the vein in the forehead is as good as the bleeding from the cephalic vein for old diseases of the face, and for emigration and redness; and the qualities are such that the patient turns his neck in twisting until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fosseur", of which this is the shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the tip on the vein, and apply pressure with your hand or something else, and let the blood issue according to the amount you see; then release the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healed and sometimes the wound is closed with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Nevertheless, the flames should not be too sharp; and ligate the vein crookedly, for the bone is near, and by chance the flames may break when they are delicate.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The bleeding from the two veins that are in the jaw helps with teeth, and with tinea, and with redness, and with a growth on the eye, and with diseases of the face; and the qualities of their bleeding are such that the patient turns his neck by twisting some ligament, as before; then he bleeds, and the bleeding is through the skin, a little from the long flame a little wide, because there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are thin, they may break; then stop the bleeding, as much as you need to, and then bind it with a linen bandage, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The bleeding of the vein in the nose is good for ague, and for sudden madness, and for diseases of the face, such as migrainous headache and redness that comes to the face, and especially when it is chronic; and the quality of the bleeding is such that the patient should hold his neck back, then squeeze his nose with his left hand, take a long, thin flame, and insert it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well otherwise, and the blood will begin to flow now; and do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then ligate it overnight, for it is quickly restored; and this is the way of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The bleeding of the two blood vessels also helps with strangulation of the windpipe, and with the beginning of hoarseness, and with many diseases, and with phlegmon, and with ulcers, and with herpes, and with eye diseases; and the quality of the bleeding is such that the patient should hold his neck back as we have said; and let the operator stand above the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a chair, then bleed the vein on the side a little widely, then draw the blood gently, or as much as is needed; then do the same on the other vein, then loosen the ligature, and squeeze both veins gently so that the patient does not choke; and leave it until morning so that the wound heals.
de la sainie des leivres	of bleeding from the gums
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The salves for sores on the lips above also help with ulcers in the mouth, and gum decay, and lip splits, and inner and outer lips.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the bleeding is to have the patient sit in front of you and hold his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, and they can be recognized because they are black, and because there are small black veins around them: therefore press one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you doubt which they are, then press the largest of each side, and likewise do to the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of bleeding under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The healing of veins that are under the tongue is helped by the healing of the cephalic vein, and it is in the constriction of the throat, and in diseases of the eye, and in diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the vein-healer is such that the patient should hold their hand in front of the sun, and touch the tongue, and look underneath on each side for a black vein: heal both of them, and do not go too deep, because there are arteries underneath.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the neck that are commonly healed are healed in two ways: either by pricking with a large mirtin flame, or an olive-shaped subtile needle called "anesil"; and they are large and subtile according to the width and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame of the myrtle is very famous, and is wide as you can see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the flat veins of the neck that contain gross and troubled blood; and this is the shape of the olive-shaped flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and is more pointed, and is for bleeding the veins gently, where there is thin yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps illnesses under the throat, in the neck, in the chest, and in the abdomen; and the surgeon must cauterize bleeding and guard against the artery underneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	If it pierces the artery and bleeding occurs, then it must be stanched as I have said; and the flame should not be held firmly but gently touched like a needle.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	If the basilic does not open clearly, then you must stretch it and change to another vein; or you may want some of its branches, or cauterize the vein in the arm where it opens clearly; and hold the flame gently, as we have said.Et s’il appert, si covient qu’il estainche la voinne, et qu’il coppe au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit; et ne doit mie demorer en la voinne, mas le flamme fust ferme et estaincha la voinne, et qu’il se vaueille de l’artere.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you want to know the location of the bleeding, then you must stretch out the arm and touch the area until you feel the pulse; then sign the spot with your fingernail, and then tie up the arm, and stop the vein with flame quickly; and be careful not to pierce the artery when you see the spot puffed up, for that is the artery: avoid it therefore.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it rising up like a child's urine, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from an artery: act quickly therefore, and place your finger over it for a long time; then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, which often happens. Tie up the arm and leave it as it is, without moving it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the bleeding is not stopped and he faints and medicine is not present, then press on the artery above where it is cut and stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a piece of wood from an oak tree, split it in half and take one of the pieces and tie it on tightly until the next day; if the bleeding stops, that is good; if not, then treat it with powders that stop bleeding, as we have said. And the stopping of the bleeding is not due to the size of the wound or the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The bleeding from the vein is helped if it draws blood from the top of the head and from the body below, because it is composed of basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said; and the surgeon must be careful not to pierce too deeply, and he should find the nerve beneath, and if it is swollen and the vessels are congested, and cannot heal, then this nerve often opens, and if it does not open in some men due to its subtlety, then you should cauterize it with a hot instrument; and cauterize the nerve as best you can.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is bleeding between the two nerves, they will make a long cut.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	Bleeding from the cephalic vein is helped if it draws blood from the head and helps the eyes; and it should be cauterized with an olive-oil flame or a myrtle flame, for this is the safest of all veins because there are no nerves or arteries beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Nevertheless, one should seek the lightest method, and if one fails the first time, one should try again; and sometimes the site swells in some men when one fails the first time, but it causes no harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the bleeding is according to your thoughts.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you should know about bleeding is that it is only done to maintain health and prevent future illnesses; and bleeding should be performed in one of the three veins: the cephalic, the facial, and the basilic; and one should bleed at the beginning of Lent, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of digestion are apparent; and one should bleed on the first or third day, after two or three hours of the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	Bleeding that is administered for illnesses has no set time, but whenever there is a need, day or night, at any hour and at all times; and one should not bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor women carrying a fetus beyond the fourth month until the seventh month.Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	They should not bleed those who are over sixty years old.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone wants to be bled, in whatever manner, it is necessary that he purges the intestines with a gentle enema if he has a lot of retained feces, so that the veins do not attract harmful superfluities from the intestines into the principal limbs; nor should one bleed those who are too bloated from meat, or who are drunk, as long as they remain so, nor the hydropsy, and if anyone wants to bleed after colic pain, vomiting, diarrhea, and frequent intercourse with a woman, and from labor, from waking and fasting, and from whatever weakens the body, either through weapons or from the body itself; then subtly withdraw the humors if the blood is thick, through meat and drink and medicine, if you have the power to do so; then enter the bath, if nothing else weakens him, to subtilize the blood, and he should be bled from the vein of the foot around midnight, as we have said; and he should guard himself that day from exertion, and from pain, and from luxury, and from similar things; and he should lie down and relax, and the bleeding person should be higher than the one being bled, and he should rub the arm two or three times, then gently tighten the bandage above the middle, for if it is too tight or too loose, it cannot draw the blood out; then he should rub the place with his hand until the veins swell and can be felt; then wet the bleeding person's hand with a little old oil, then put his thumb from his left hand on the vein under the place where he wants to bleed, so that the vein does not shrink away from the blade.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	Because there are veins that flow like cords to the heart, and some that are filled with winds, so that when one applies flame, it retreats from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus one finds these things; and if he opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, so it is necessary for the surgeons to be skilled in such matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens the first time, that is good; if not, try again a little lower at the same site or above it, if the area is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the part is swollen and the patient feels distressed, then let him wait for one or two days without binding the arm: perhaps a hot abscess will develop; and do not enter into a bath, then begin the bleeding again if it pleases her; and if the opening is small, then cut through the skin subtlely and you doubt that it will not flow as much blood as you wish, then apply the flame directly to that opening; and work gently, so that the part becomes swollen; because this happens many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the area swollen, do not re-open the wound, and apply a little liniment of oil, for it lightens the body of blood, and in this place the liniment of oil is used; and in this way administer the liniment of oil in every wound that you open veins to stop the flow of blood; and this also makes a poultice and bandage when applied to the area; thus the blood flows gently and separates when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if a large abscess forms, which often happens, especially when the wound is not bled except for the first time or when the opening of the vein is small, be quick and apply to the area a sponge moistened with warm water and salt, and hold it for an hour; and you should do this after the flow of blood from the wound, and if anything remains in the area after several days, a blackness or greenness, it does no harm; and if you see it, apply some aloe or myrrh made into a poultice, or something similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often an abscess and appearance at the bleeding of basil: place your hand on it, and if you find the area soft to the pressure of the hand, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid therefore placing on it anything of what we have mentioned, for perhaps it cuts into an artery; but make a dry poultice to harden the area, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to its amount and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for those who are full and swollen, and need bloodletting, that one makes them a larger wound, and the flames should be wide; and for those who are weak, do the opposite, and they should be bled little and often, and one should bleed them by cutting across, not puncturing; and this method of bleeding is safe from blood loss and nerve damage, and is better than bleeding from a long or wide cut.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for those whose body needs bleeding, one should give them moist bread in pomegranate juice; if they are hot-tempered, bleed them three or four times. And if of a cold complexion, eat moist bread before the bleeding in syrup made from mulled wine, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and cloves, and well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	If he faints during bleeding, after the loss of a lot of blood, he should drink a warm drink and a subtle scented syrup, and use the other remedies we mentioned in the chapter on syncope, to open the veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to wound his arm and bleed again, as needed, when it is weakened by heavy bleeding, let him bleed a little at a time, according to the amount of his strength, continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wants to wound his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, let him bleed seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to bleed elsewhere, let him bleed on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is a lot of blood in the body that has become heated and causes fever; therefore, you must draw out a large quantity and widen the opening so that it bleeds freely; then you should examine all the conditions of bleeding, and put your hand over his pulse when he bleeds, so that death does not come through the vein, and this happens many times when the bleeder is careless; and when you see the arm loosening and bleeding a second time, and the opening is closed, you must press firmly on it; nor if it is crooked, must you extend the arm suddenly, for that would be bad; but let it be as he bleeds a second time; or touch it with the tip of a flame, so that the congealed blood at the vein opening melts, and put a little cold water on it, and press lightly on it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be and don't bind it, until the abscess is settled.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to let blood a second time, let it be in the same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The veins in the arm are healed in place of the vein in the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the method of bleeding is for the patient to put their hand in hot water until the vein becomes red; then let it be bound gently so that the vein appears well, and then bleed now from the middle, not from the large or long vein; and let the incision be wide, and let the bleeding be done near the joint of the hand, and if blood does not come out, put the hand back in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you have enough; and if it is standing, do not put the hand back in hot water, because it is put more in winter than when standing; and bleeding from this vein is safer than all other veins, as there are no arteries or nerves in it.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The bleeding of the salvation of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it is done: twist the hand, and put it in hot water until the vein swells, and if one sees it; and if you bleed from the middle, and if you cut it from top to bottom, it does no harm; and do not go too deep because the nerves are completely naked under the skin, and then put the hand back in hot water if the blood is frozen in the wound and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have stopped the bleeding as much as necessary, then put oil and silk on the wound to close it quickly, and do the same for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The bleeding in the left hand is useful for the disease of the mice, and do everything as I told you about the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The salvation of the soul is good for all diseases that are under the body, such as diseases of the mind, and retention of fluids, and diseases of the bowels, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of its salvation are that the patient puts his foot in hot water, and rubs on the wound until it breaks, and lies on the joint of the foot; and if the wound is at the ankle, and up to the foot, they go very far into the bowels; therefore heal it at the widest vein, or at the ankle, which works better.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you tie it on the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are underneath, and tie it across also as though cutting; and let the flames be extinguished.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water, and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the healer fails the first time, they should try again a little higher up, for the place is salty; do not be afraid of nerves, as we have said, and likewise with the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The location of the sciatic nerve is at the back of the leg; its treatment is good for pain in the hip when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of his healing is such that the patient enters the bath, and twists above the ankle IIII turns, for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then heal in every way you can, and by crossing over; and it is better that you cover it, for the place is safe, and it is very relaxed in many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not believe it, then heal some vein of his which opens on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and be careful of the nerves; and make the blood flow as much as you can see, and then loosen the bandage, and put cotton on top and tighten it; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	Of cupping treatments:
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Leeches are made of horns, or brass, or glass; and bleeding is done in two ways: by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping which is done by burning is in two ways: with all fire, or without fire; and cupping that is done by burning and by bloodletting is done at 14 places on the body, of which one is entirely at the top of the head; and the other is in the neck; and II others are on either side of the neck; and the cupping under the chin; and the cupping on the two shoulders; and the cupping over the hips; and the cupping among the two arms; and the cupping of the two legs; and the cupping of the two ankles; and the cupping is not to be administered, neither with all fire nor without fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	If for the sake of necessity or habit, one must bleed every hour at the beginning or end of the month, in the morning and evening and throughout the day. For there are some who, when they need to bleed, have a heavy head; and some who experience bloating and redness on their face, head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes; and some who experience a drop of blood in their mouth, swollen tongue, and bleeding gums; and there are those who faint, and see dark things, wounds, and dead people.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the month of May, we order him to fast for three hours after daybreak.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The bleeding of the nose helps with headaches ... that affect the eyes, and it must not be after the evacuation of the whole body; and this venting is in place of the bleeding of the head, and it must not be used by those who have a cold complexion, or who have catarrh, because it does them great harm; and for this reason, the elderly should not use it, nor those with cold diseases of the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often recover from it become obese, and for this reason, the cupping glasses should be placed a little lower due to the risk of obesity.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventouse on the neck is placed at the junction of the head and the base of the skull, and for this reason it helps with constrictions in the feet, and splits in the channel of the lungs, and with fullness, and repletion; and it should not be applied too strongly, for if it is held too tightly, it can cause obstruction or damage to the stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventouse at the two sides of the neck helps with headache, and blindness and eye pain, and strangulation, and toothache, and is placed at the junction of the head and the base of the skull; and you must instruct the operator to express his hand when placing it so that he does not press the artery and cause bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	Ventilation below the chin is good for mouth diseases, and gum corruption, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of bleeding from the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The windings of the shoulders are worth a disease that comes from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The ventouse on the sides of the chest is worth as much as three veins in the arm, for it draws blood from these large vessels; and instruct the operator not to press too deeply, for beneath there are nerves and arteries.Li ventosations dou bossu de la speche si vaut a dolors del petis, et est en leu de la sainie de la speche, et covient que li sainor la mette sus la speche et adentres, et non pas sur le col ou la gorge.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping glass which is on the buttock is good for varicose veins and for diseases underneath, and it must be a large cup made of brass, which needs to be applied with great care; and if it were too thin, it would break, causing large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	Cupping glasses on the legs heal quickly because they draw blood from throughout the body and are good for old pains in the bones and joints, and the bladder, and restore the flow of fluids; they are located at the sides of the two knees and ankles, and over time they weaken the body and bring about fainting in many cases.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the cupping glass is that you first apply it empty, and suck gently, and place it firmly, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the area become red and swollen, and the blood vessel appear; then release, and re-apply the cupping glasses, and be mindful of the condition of the body, for there are those who have very sensitive skin, and small pores: so one should suck only once, and make wide wounds, and a little deep ones; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, one should suck twice: the first time to thin out the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the vein is very thick, it must be pricked three times; and when we want to draw a little blood, we prick only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want a lot of blood, we must bleed often; and if the blood is thick, then pierce it with a needle, and let the ends be so that the skin is pierced suddenly, and it suits those who have thick and hard skin, and who have narrow pores, to anoint the places on the cupping glasses with aperitif and dissolutive oil: if it is in summer, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if it is in winter, use watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the surplus is large and cold, then take oil of marjoram, or of balsam, or aniseed oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if one to whom we bleed has soft skin and large pores, then no oil should be put on him, but he should be washed after bleeding with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or pumpkin water, or porcelain water, or similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, if they rise from their bed, or from water of myrrh, and of sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those with large superfluities rise from old wine, or from dry water, or from the decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things; and it is not appropriate to bleed by leech before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for one hour or two; and do not sleep after venting, and it is necessary that he be vigilant when he must be bled and when he is bled.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And watch if the person who is being bled is constipated, and if the blood is too thin and inflamed; then he should eat cool things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuce with garlic, and similar things; and drink little, and eat the meat of young pigs, and moist foods.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those with a cold complexion should drink honey syrup, and moderate old and new scented wine, and drink little, and eat young pigs and pigeons; and the day he is bled, he should drink more than he eats; and it is appropriate to give some men theriac or musk before bleeding, or afterwards, to comfort the main limbs; and it should be subtle for the blood, but those with a hot complexion should not drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The cupping glasses that are put on without burning are those that are placed over the liver, and the mumps, and gout, and over the stomach and abdomen, and the kidneys and hips; because these members do not bear being burned under the eyes, and it is only done to draw blood from one member to another, as we do when we put them on the breasts when the child is teething; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we do when we apply cupping glasses over the stomach and abdomen to reduce the member; and it relieves pain when there is congestion or a stone, and by its attractive virtue it may draw out the congestion or force the stone from its place; and so it does when it is placed over the liver and the mumps when there is retained flatulence, and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water, as in diseases of the pleurisy, and in this way one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the cupping glass administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it has a diameter of two inches and a half inch deep, and on the side near the middle there is a small hole, just large enough to push through a needle, and it should be made of brass, smooth in front so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb; and in the middle there is a bar made of brass or iron, for placing a candle, and they come in both large and small sizes depending on the illness and age of those who use them; for the ventouses used by children are different from those used by the elderly, and those used by the thin are different from those used by the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one should place this ventouse on the limb thus: take a candle of wax or tallow, and place it inside the ventouse through the bar in the middle, so that the flame is at the bottom of the ventouse and does not burn the patient; then place it on the limb, and hold your fingers over the hole we mentioned, so that when you wish, the vapors can escape, and remove the ventouse; then apply the tallow as before, and repeat often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the cupping glass which is administered for disease of pleurisy, for all acute diseases, there is no pipe or aperture, and it is not removed until it is filled with water, and is placed on the limb only thus; and that is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Leeches are not removed until in members where one cannot place cupping glasses due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in naked flesh, such as fingers or toes, and others; and the quality of their use is that when you find leeches that are in clean sweet water without any dirt, you take them; and put one in sweet water, until they become familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; and then let him be bled from a vein and with cupping glasses, then rub the member until it turns red, and place the leeches on; and when they are full, and bite, if it is a place where one can place a cupping glass, put one on, for that is much better.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, then raise the vein with a needle, and then with water, very well, and then press it; and if the vein is too tight after the body of the leeches, moisten a linen cloth in cold water, and place it on top, until the bleeding stops; and if the bleeding increases, place ground vitriol, or galls, and similar things, on top, until it stops; or you place half a handful of peeled peas on the site, and leave them until they turn green at the site, and it will now stop; and if you need more, take other leeches.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the leeches will not attach, then rub the bleeding site with fresh blood, or poke the vein with a needle until the blood comes out, and then place the leeches on top, and as soon as they smell the blood, they will attach; and when you see that they are defecating, then sprinkle a little powder of ground aloe and salt, or ash, and they will stop now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is for the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that the foolish people who gaze upon this chapter will not find it in any of the ancient books or letters; and for this reason, knowledge is strange in our land, for I have never found a good one; and I know nothing about it, except through the knowledge of the ancient books, in which I have studied so much that I have gained understanding, and through experience and the custom of my life. And I have described to you in this chapter what is contained within, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, just as I have done in the two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, let us say in the prologue of this book the sums of the words and the chapters where the sage sets his understanding, and remains on truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or crush injury befalls someone, you must hurry to treat the patient from both sides with a hot poultice, if nothing else binds him, such as weakness of body, or fever, or old age; and if the weather is not very warm, or too cold; and eat cold foods, that is, cold eggs, and milk and cheese from a goat or kid, and drink no wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and do not fill himself too much with meat that fills the veins with blood, until you suspect a hot abscess, or spreading of matter in the limb; then return the patient to his former treatment.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, one should feed the patient foods that promote swelling and粘性, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, testes, feet, pig stomach, offal, fresh fish, and thick wine, and similar things.Et li carnes qui sont de colde norrissement, si conviennent qu’on le fasse manger a grant fin, ou il ait grand besoin; car l’os qui est brisié ne voudroit mie demourer en lieu chaut et colde, s’il le pot eviter.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	And meats that are of cold nature should be eaten in moderation, or when there is great need; because a broken bone does not want to stay in a hot and cold place if it can be avoided. For with cool swelling, bruises heal faster.And the meats which are of hot norrissement, si conviennent qu’on le fasse manger en petit quanitite et en grant fin ou il ne se veult mie demourer; car l’os qui est brisié ne voudroit mie demourer en lieu colde et chaut s’il le pot eviter.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well set or joined according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of young children; but have no concern, reset the broken bone using the large tendons that stretch and join the limb together, so that it is forced into its former position; do not stop at all in his work, and for this reason one should nourish themselves with plenty of meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that there are various types of fractures in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter about all types of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is one fracture that goes to the bone, and another in sharpening, as with the point of a writing quill.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it is a fracture with a wound, then it is all one small split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each part has its own technique and proper instrument in the restoration, according to what memory comes to mind; and the break in the bone is known by the fact that the limb is twisted, and it appears clearly when pressed with the hand; and when there is no twistiness nor pain in the touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture; but it can have a twist, or a split, or a minor fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You should not move it with your hand, but apply remedies that are mentioned below, and then hold it firmly and gently.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the fracture which goes into the bone, and are the two parts separated, they should now be put in place equally, so that hot abscesses may come; and if cold abscesses come, then let it rest for a day, until the abscess is soothed; then put it equal to the movement that you can easily and gently, and know that the restoration of this is easier than the restoration of that which has pieces; then constrain it, as it should be done thereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, whether it is two parts, whether it is a hand or foot, or your hand, if it is a small limb, or two tendons, or one tendon and your hand; and put the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken limb are separated, then put them back into place by all means, according to the movement that you can, and be careful that your work does not cause the patient injury or pain; and join well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel it with your hand if it does not seem right; then set it well, and do not twist or press too hard as those who cause hot abscesses and contractions in the limb by their work, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the member is at rest, then examine the patient carefully to ensure that he does not move it, whether he is waking or sleeping, turning or in any other way; and be sure that the member is so secure that he feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, then it is not yet healed, and you should put him in such a position that he feels no pain; and be careful that he is set straight so that no crookedness comes to him when he is restored; and the quality of the broken member is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken members are diverse in smallness and greatness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Because there are small members, such as arms and fingers and the like: these should be wrapped in soft, thin linen; and for larger ones, such as thighs and legs, use a wide, strong bandage, for the wide bandages embrace the entire large member and constrict it evenly all around so that no swelling remains; then tie around light sponges, three or four turns depending on the member, and squeeze your hand slightly all over the bandage, then go above the break and constrict less so that the break is moved a little; then soften the bandage little by little, until you hold most of the healthy area, then take another bandage and wrap it straight back over the broken part; then go below the break again and constrict gently, neither too hard nor too soft, as we have said above in the first turn; then place sponges or linen between the bandages so that they are all even, then tie a bandage over all of it, and then put your splints on well.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, apply a hot compress to soothe the abscess and reduce the swelling for several days; then use a tight bandage made from half a length of cane, or wooden stick, or palm frond, shaped thus:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	but the bandage that is placed over the fracture should be a little thicker and wider than the others; it should also be as long as needed for the limb in terms of size, then wrap tightly around the bandages as before, then tie a thread over it accordingly, just as you did for the first fracture; the tighter it is, the better. The thread should be fine, not too thick nor too thin, and made from soft flax. For if the threads are thick, as I have seen foolish people do, twisting cords of coarsely spun flax, this is a great mistake, for the bandage cannot be even if it is too thin, and there should be no more than half a finger's width between each bandage.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is sore between the eyes of the stars after the stretching in their healthy state, then place under them linen pads or woolen bandages so that they do not blister.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a fracture, and the bone is broken, I will describe the treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not good to dislocate all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	Because when a member is inflamed, one must not put on plasters until after five or seven days, or more depending on the heat of the abscess; and here is the way of ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and twisting: take flour that is held in the walls of the mill, and cook it with an egg-yolk, and apply this preparation, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it. This is the common way of the plaster restoring the fracture in various conditions, especially in women and small children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way of plaster to restore fractures, dislocations and twists: take 3 barley grains and ladani and inula and asafetida and gum arabic and myrrh, each 10 grains; aloes, 5 grains; alechil, 8 grains; and make them into powder, and mix them with plenty of egg; if the person's complexion is hot, use this plaster, because it has a good composition and restores broken bones quickly, and it helps many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way of plaster that is good for twisting: take mugwort and balms, each 10 drams; myrrh and aloes, each 8 drams; acacia 6 drams; Armenian bole 10 drams, and grind well, and cook with water or egg-yolk, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another way of a poultice for joints and bones out of their places, and soothes the resulting pain; and the cut is used on the bone and the break: take fresh lamb's skin, and moisten it in vinegar and oil, and apply it to the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This poultice does not restore, but it is good for soothing hot abscesses, and it removes pains properly.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of poultice that restores broken bones: take dry fig leaves and deadnettle leaves, crush them together, and make a poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way of poultice for the restoration of bone breaks and to reduce swelling from an abscess: take lamb's fat, render it and mix with honey, and apply to the affected area. This also helps with pain.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take the roots of marsh mallow, chamomile, and violets, and wheat flour, one part each; and crush, and cook in wine, and if the member is swollen, cook with moist coriander water or just water, and apply.Another way: take lamb's fat, render it and mix with honey, and apply to the affected area. This also helps with pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method of embrocation stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take the roots of comfrey, and the seeds of flax, borage, milk thistle, and camomile, and the flowers of violets and camomile; take equal parts of each, crush them, and cook in water with salt, or fresh water, or wine, depending on the heat of the member and its condition.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates writes in his book that one should put on the broken member to restore strength a cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and says it should be between two things neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And Galen seems to say that one should put on the broken member, to restore it, dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another type of plaster that helps with injury and pain: take mugwort and shaved human hair, or bird feathers, and bee wax, and mix them together, and make a plaster from it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then loosen it a little after, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; if not, loosen it in a few days. And if pain comes to the site, or itching, without rest or swelling, hasten and loosen it and remove the embrocation immediately; then take a light cloth and a sponge of sea moisture, and dip them in water, and lay them on the site until the itching ceases and the pain is soothed; then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on a clean bandage, moistened in water or rose oil, and wrap it around a nut, until you are sure of the hot abscess; and calm the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then begin again with the subtle cautery, and a little embrocation, and do not tighten it as much as before; and subtly until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the hot abscess is reduced and the redness and pain and swelling are gone, then you may need to use poultice and binding again, so begin again as you did before.Et s’il adonques ne se boit li sang, et le membre est sane, si met l’escrivein a la fine de la journee ou au commencement de la nuit;
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	If the limb does not receive any of what we have said, do not loosen it until three, four, five, or seven days; and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what one sees, so that the fracture heals and the flesh approaches the bone; then restrain it more than before, and increase its bulk, as I have said before. And if you see the place drier than is necessary, know that nourishment cannot come there; therefore, wet it with warm water every time you loosen it, and do this every third day, and ease a little the ligature. Through this work, nourishment comes to the limb, and quickly mend what the foolish do, who restore the limb crookedly: this is bad, and these are feeble works, and I see no other result from them but weariness and doing it correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many types of fractures, with different shapes and distinct causes. Some fractures are caused by the impact of a sword, breaking the bone all the way to the membrane under the bone, as in the case of an axe or a club; this type of fracture is called a "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword cuts into the bone without breaking through, and this type is called a  "partial fracture;" and the wound of these two fractures are large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a closed fracture, or a split, or from falling on stone, or from other similar causes.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if the bone is broken and protruding, reaching the membrane below the bone, or sitting on top of the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is in the bone as fine as a hair, and the crack is small, then this type of fracture is called  "capillaire". And if the wound is caused by a stone, or by falling, or by something similar, and drives the piece of bone inward, and the site is grooved like the grooves made by blacksmiths when they work on kettles; then it enters the bone inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more often to those with moist bones in their heads, like children's skulls; and it happens with all types of fractures where small pieces are displaced, just as tiles are. I will speak about this later in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we should know all types of fractures through examination and observation, and by understanding the corrupt flesh that lies above them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hairline fracture is understood by uncovering the bone and rubbing it with a finger, and if there is a black fracture line.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fractures, be aware of adverse events from the injury, and if you see any harmful incidents such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, convulsion, paralysis, fever, eyes bulging out and turning red, and other similar symptoms in various conditions, then healing is not possible without a doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	If you do not see any frightening incidents and expect a recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the child comes to you for the first time and it is winter, then it is necessary to cut the nail before the fourteenth day that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the summer, then you must hurry to cut the nail before the seventh day, otherwise, the tissue underneath the nail will be corrupted and the incidents that we have mentioned will occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone reaches just to the membrane that covers the brain, then you should split the fractured part thus: and it is necessary that you grasp the head of the wounded person, and expose the bone in every way that you can, and the shape of the wound more thoroughly than you can, and if blood flows out when exposing the bone, or a hot abscess forms, use aid as it is appropriate, and you must fill the site with damp rags soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the hot abscesses are soothed, and be sure there is no more bleeding; then begin around the bone to remove it, and this is done according to two methods of operation: one method is that you cut tightly at the fracture line in front, and this is its form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then insert another chisel larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you have a variety of different tools, some narrow and some wide, and some pointed, and some made of iron; and work gently so that you do not bleed the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is thick and hard, then you must drill around it, so that you may apply tools with chisels, not so deep as to penetrate beyond the bone of the skull, and there should be a rim or ring on top of the point, preventing the point from going beyond the bone; and you must have several, so that each one fits into its place in the thickness of the bone, so that you may have chisels for every kind of skull; and this is the form of the three kinds of chisels:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for drilling around the broken bone is to place one chisel on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you feel that the bone is pierced; then move the chisel to another spot a little further, and continue all around; then cut into the space between the holes with incisions, and do this most skillfully and gently, as we have said, until you draw out the bone by hand or with some instrument like tweezers or pliers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sinuses.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and split the bone, then it is appropriate that you remove the membrane that is adhering to the bone with any other instrument similar to a chisel, but it should be more thin and subtle than the other chisels; and if anything of the small bones or any scales remain, lightly scrape them away with the instrument; then cure the wound as we have said, with tenting and ointments.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way of operating is that which Galen describes, which is much safer; and he praises it highly, and his word is final.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	First, you must uncover a portion of the bone where the open fracture is located; then, once that part is uncovered, place under it the tip of this lenticular incision tool, which is shaped thus:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, and the part is tender on both sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then tap with a small mallet upwards, so that you gently tap the bone all around, and take great care of the membrane that is underneath; if it is attached to the bone, loosen it gently, for the bone can be loosened without harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is only cut slightly on top, with small pieces, then one must smooth out that roughness, and remove the scales with a sharp razor, of which you should have various amounts, in order to use the most suitable one according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Take a large razor at first, and then a sharper one, and do not stop doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hairline and subtle fractures, one must apply treatment according to its nature; and this is not a simple task for one who has dedicated their study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the wound is exposed, you should take a linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it over the wound; then take another double cloth, in two or three folds, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth; and do this as gently as you can so that you do not put pressure on the eye, then administer a bandage over it, without tightening it more than is necessary to hold the wound in place; and leave it like this for one or two days, until the abscesses are relieved, then remove the bandage, and apply healing medicines such as lily roots, and bran, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things; and make a powder from these things, and apply it to the wound, and also administer soothing medicines without biting; and be careful that the wound is clean, so that you do not leave any ointment behind, or allow any pus to collect, for when pus collects under the membrane of the brain, it will fester and cause great harm to the patient. For when one applies something biting to the eye, it will close up above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without a doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if darkness does not come but only because of the medicine that one has placed on it, so that such a virtue may have, then you must take a part of honey and III parts of rose oil and with it glue a bandage, and place it over the syphilis; then heal it in ways of healing that are appropriate, until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the jawbone above are broken, one by itself, because they are two bones; and below is cartilage, which does not break but only bends or twists, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you must boil your little finger or toe, and put the break inside your index finger, and hold it in place with a bandage, until the nail grows back to its natural shape; and do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your treatment.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is above the nail and the fingers cannot reach the place, you should put it in line with the top of a thick needle.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is of two parts, then do the same, and try to restore it on the first day if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscesses are healed, then boil to the tip of the nail a tent of linen bandages, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you put another one on the other side, if there is a fracture there; and let the tents be so thick that they fill the holes of the ears.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some restorers say that one must moisten the tents with butter, and change them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I do not think that is good, but one should wet the tent with egg white and flour; then leave it as long as the bone is soft and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes they put on a goose's beak instead of tents, and wind a linen cloth around it, and hold the fracture, and breathe into the wound; now do as you wish.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if hot abscesses come to the nose while you are working on it, put on cerote or cotton soaked in rose oil, or a little dyaquilon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no abscess that comes out, then put on a plaster with egg white, and flour of vetches, and incense powder, mixed with egg white; then put over it light dressings, and do not bandage the nail; and if the fracture is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract it with appropriate instruments for this purpose, then cut the wound, and treat it with warm things, healing, and binding, as with plasters and ointments appropriate to this; and if there is no wound inside the nail, then treat it with tenting, and put in splinters of wood, until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the dislocation of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is dislocated below and there is no open wound, and the break is only on the outside, and not broken in two, with a lump inside, then it can be detected easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the break is on the right side, you should put your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the break is on the left side of the jaw, then put your index finger from the right hand, and gently push the break back into place, and hold it there with the other hand.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jaw is displaced by one-third, then you must administer an extension of one-third, so that it is made equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement in the teeth, or looseness, then they are bound with a thread of gold or silver or silk; then place cerotum on the broken mandible, and place a double layer of cloth over it; and place a large, well-made plate, or a piece of leather of equal size, long and wide according to the mandible, and tie it onto the muzzle as tightly as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat soft foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the shape changes, then loosen it on the third day, and then reset what has changed; and place an ointment over it, made from powdered milk with plenty of egg or flour of sisament, after you have removed the cerotum; and place a light linen over the ointment, and if the ointments become irritated and the condition of the patient does not change, leave it as long as it takes to heal; many are healed within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if hot abscesses appear, then administer what we have said many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, examine it carefully to see if any pieces of bone are missing; then treat the wound with suitable instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and none remain inside, then stitch up the wound, if it is wide, and place upon it suitable poultices to promote healing, until it is cured.
de la forcele	about the armpit:
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The armpit is broken in many ways towards the shoulder, and there are three types of breaks: it can be broken and dislocated with two pieces, which is the easiest to heal; or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is when there is no wound in the break, that you have .ij. ministers, so that one of them holds the shoulder where the collarbone is broken; and the other stretches the neck towards the affected part; then place the break evenly between your fingers, so that its shape is as it should be, and there is no appearance or swelling.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to stretch further, place a round pillow of cloth or wool under the patient's shoulder, and make it thick according to your need; then loosen the collarbone and squeeze the pillow in your hand, so that you place the break evenly, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the collarbone out of its socket because it is too deep, then the patient should lie on his back and place  a small pillow under his shoulder, and the ministers should push the shoulder upwards while the patient holds the pillow, so that the bone of the collarbone rises.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then feel the break with your fingers, and if you find it broken, you should split it; and gently pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot join due to any protruding fragment, you should cut one of the incisions that you have made; but place this instrument under the collarbone to protect the shoulder joint:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	It should be in the shape of a spoon, not pointed, and as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and the extent of the injury; it has two heads, as you can see, one wide and the other narrow, depending on the nature of the wound you have made when treating the bones. Once you are sure there is no hot abscess, close the wound, and if the opening is small, or if you doubt there is an abscess, pack the wound with bandages and tenting, according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses come, soak a bandage in rose oil and garlic and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The dislocation of a bone, when there is no wound or fracture, is treated by applying the powder from the mill and egg white to the bone, and placing light compresses on top, and if necessary, a splint under the joint. Then take a band one palm wide, place a double layer of cloth over the compresses and powder; then take a thin strip three digits wide and long, wrap it around the band so that the ends hang down; place this over the fracture, and wrap the band around the neck, under the healthy shoulder joint, and under the injured joint. Adjust each part, and when you see that the ligament is holding the fracture in place and the strip is not moving over the broken bone, change it every day, and when the ligature loosens, tighten it again. Have the patient lie on his back and place a small pillow under the shoulder to raise the shoulder joint; this will lighten the force on the collarbone, or tie the arm to the neck for up to 20 days if no adverse events occur; then start the powder treatment again if necessary, and keep doing this until it is healed. It should be healed in about 28 days, but some people recover more quickly.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Then it happens that the shoulder is broken or dislocated in its broad place, and one does not feel it except by touch; then prepare according to the figure of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in every way you can. Then put flour from the mill with egg white on the site, and light sponges, and put a double cloth on top; then place a large and thin pillow, slightly larger than the shoulder, and if there is a depression under the pillow anywhere on the shoulder, fill that depression with a sponge of linen so that the pillow lies evenly. Then tightly bind it with a wide bandage, so that the pillow does not move from its place, and examine the binding every day; and whenever it becomes loose, tighten it, and if the pillow has moved from its place, adjust it equally, and let the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder is restored in 20 to 25 days. And when this number of days is complete, then loosen it and be careful, because it is not a bone that sets easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone protrudes out, and not under the heart, make an incision on top, and in the bone, and do what we have said for the dislocation of the elbow to soothe the hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the dislocation of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The peace is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; it often breaks at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it sinks downward, and the patient feels great pain and a lack of strength, and dizziness, and sometimes he vomits blood, and the hair falls out from the broken bone, and he feels ill in every way.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and puts a cushion between his shoulders, then presses his shoulders, and brings the sides of both ribs together with your hands, and carefully tries to put it in an even manner as much as he can, so that the shape of the bone becomes as it should be; then place poultices and bandages over the fracture site with a subtle powder of salt or other light wood, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it onto the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the ligature gently towards the back, and tighten it comfortably, and check every hour if it has softened, and if it has, tighten it; and if it needs to be loosened because of corrosion or itching that comes to the site, or pain or abscess, then do so quickly, loosen it, remove the poultice, and treat what has come in various ways of treatment; then reapply the poultice, and tighten it as much as it takes to heal.
de la brisure des costes	about the breaking of ribs:
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	You should know that the breaking of ribs only occurs in the large ribs near the back, and at their ends inside, and they only bend because they are slippery; and it feels very good when pressed on both sides.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatment is to reset the break, making it even as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply the ointment and bind it with a bandage if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the rib fracture is declined inward, then the patient feels great pain and piercing, as with pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane; and also has pains in his side, and coughs up, and vomits a great quantity of blood, and it is a very serious condition, and the ancients have placed great importance on it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if they have those who say that one should administer foods that swell the belly, in order to push the fracture out.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not believe that hot abscesses will heal if they have not become heated.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if he has come, then heal him.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some say that one should place cupping glasses over the area to draw out the infection, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is a doubt that the cupping glasses might draw out the excess fluids due to the weakness of the patient.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some say that one must cover the area with wet woolen cloth in warm oil, and place tenting between the ribs to apply pressure evenly all around, then it should be bandaged with a bandage of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that pokes through the bandage, and there is doubt about the patient, then one should split above the site of the broken rib, and put a tool underneath to protect the lung; and then one must split the bone, and gently pull, and then sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a warm abscess comes, place it on moistened pads in rose oil, and place it on the affected area; treat the area around the abscess as needed, and let it lie quietly on its side where it is, until it heals.
de la brisure dou col	of the fracture of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes there is a fracture of the bones in the neck, and it can bend; and also with the spine in the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will recover or not, take note if their hands are soft and swollen and numb, and they cannot move them or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is deadly in many cases, and if they are numb and can feel nothing when the joints are pressed and pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the ailment will be cured if proper treatment is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar condition occurs in the spine, and you want to know if they will recover or not, take note if their feet are numb, and if the symptoms are also present in their hands and back, and if there is windiness and urination without willing it; and when they lie on their stomach, there is urination without willing it.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is asleep on his back and wants to turn over, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is deadly; therefore do not labor in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this event does not come to him, then it is a lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you apply an hot poultice if there is an abscess, and put on the spine rose oil or egg yolk oil until it is soothed; then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and tie it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and he must not sleep on the part where he feels the pain until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is exposed, cover the wound with a bandage; remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with one stitch, then treat the wound with ointment and char until it is healed; and if the shoulder bone is broken, which is called the "shoulder blade," place your thumb in your left hand, and the bandage equally on both hands to your ability, then apply the plaster and bandage, if you need them; then compress, and if there is a bone exposed, remove it, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the hip bone:
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Then it happens that the bones of the hip are broken, and if this happens, then there will be a little lessening in the head; and they do a long sting, and decline to the bowels, and there is pain, and piercing, and swelling where they are broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it so that you are on the break; and know which is the break and its shape; and if the break is only in the head, put equal pressure on the break so that it is at its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long, or it declines inward, then let the patient lie on his belly so that the restoration of that break may be prepared for him.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it equal, then apply the plaster, and then put on a board or a log, and press the break so that it does not move; and fill in the space under the ribs so that the ribcage is equalized.Et si li estele ne peut demorer sus la briseure, et que l’estele se mueve, si covient que tu mettes le malaide sus une ciaze ou un traicti, si qu’il ne se mueve, tant que li restauration soit aparaillie.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if a boil appears, do not touch it until the boil is drained, and apply what we have mentioned earlier; then return to restoration, and restrain as appropriate, if there are no adverse events; and that is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The 'adjutoires' is what is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is dislocated, it should be restored according to one of the two methods. The first method is to take a straight stick, according to this form:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two arms with two cords, and they can be pulled up, and have the patient sit on one chair; then let him bend his broken arm over his waist until he reaches the elbow, and hold a wooden curve in one hand, then pull it up against something heavy or have an assistant stretch it downward; then have the surgeon place the fracture equal to his hands together, so that the fracture returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is to have the patient lean forward on his elbow, and tie his hand to his neck; then command two assistants, one to hold what is above the fracture in his hands, and the other to hold under the cord and stretch each one to their part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, then constrict the ligament below the fracture, and above it, and extend each of the ministers to his part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, then you should put one bandage in the middle below the joint, and another towards the neck, under the fracture; and likewise, if the fracture is towards the neck, then it is necessary to put the bandages lightly, without effort, so that the fracture is even on the joint, and above the neck; then put the fracture evenly, as it should be, and constrict it, if no abscesses appear.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if abscesses come, then do not tighten for up to seven days, and put on a poultice of milk and rose oil until the abscesses are soothed; then tighten it, and the manner of tightening is to put the poultice over the fracture, then assemble the arm over the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put on the bandage, and tighten over the shoulder and the arm, so that the arm is in a resting position, unless some thing deflates it or the bone moves.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone will move, use splints, and place over the fracture a splint that is larger and stronger than the others, and have between each splint .i. finger's width of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes the fracture .iij. fingers on either side; then pull on the splints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter above the fracture, with greater force and less separation.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the setting of the stars, and the constriction, as we have said, at the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the hot abscess, let it be bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine the bandage every three days, so that itching or swelling does not come to the spot, or the growth of hair to the member because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If it happens, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents occur, do not unbind it until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach; and place beneath the shoulder one cushion filled with wool equally, and examine every hour of the day and night that the figure of the broken member does not move, or the bandage become soft; then it will heal by the power of medicine, and give him the food that we have mentioned earlier, in such a way that the food is very subtle; and when he begins to recover, let the food be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to be wrapped in bandages for forty days, and then one should loosen them and administer baths and ointment remedies to direct the area.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stricture is severe and blocked, it will remain unloosed for fifty days or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of 2 bones, which are called the 'forearm', one of which is small, and is that next to the armpit; and the other is large, and is that below, towards the little finger; by chance, only the large forearm may break, or the small one, and by chance both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, their restoration is easy and healing swift; but when the large ones are broken, healing is more difficult, and they hurt more than when both are broken at once.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small bone is broken, then it should be stretched gently and put back into place.And when you have set it, bind it up well in linen cloth and apply a plaster to hold it firm, for seven days or more if need be.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	If the large bone is broken, then it must be stretched harder; and let him lie on his back, with his affected hand raised above the others, and his little finger lower than the rest, and let the patient cross his legs over himself, and put a pillow in front of him to support his head so that he feels no pain; then one assistant should raise his sound arm towards the affected part, and another the opposite arm above him.And if he feels any discomfort, let them lower both arms at once, and then raise them again gently, until they find a position where he feels no pain; then, having found this position, they must hold his arms in that place for a quarter of an hour or more if necessary.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then let him put on the mirror evenly, according to his best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture there are pieces, put each one in its place, and if none are out of place that poke the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, do it above and on the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken about it in the singular chapter; take the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if at the beginning of the restoration, abscesses arise, then apply a bandage of cerate made of rose oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft; and gently lay the bandage on top, until the abscesses are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the cerate, and apply the plaster made from mill-powder with egg white; then place the stars, and let the star over the fracture be a little stronger and larger than the others; and understand that he must have six stars on the arm in various positions: whether the fracture is in one bone or two; and press harder over the fracture than elsewhere, lessening the pressure gradually as before; and let the bandages over the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or rough; and let the thread used to tighten them be made of linen, neither too thick nor too fine, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And examine the member and the ligament after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident happens to the member, such as itching coming to the member, then you should wash the member with warm water until the itching is relieved; and let the member not be tightly bound but rather allowed to rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then restart the compression, and if the ligaments are loosened and the bones displaced, and similar things, then adjust them.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if one takes a bath so that the nourishment cannot reach the member because it is too constricted, then one should loosen it a little and leave it for some days, until the nourishment flows, and then tighten it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of the things we have mentioned come to the patient, then do not release him until 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Or he can put his hands around his neck, and let his neck be even, and avoid movement and dislocation, and sleep on his back; and know that this broken bone will be healed in 30 or 35 days, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexes of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that in the back of the hand and to our fingers there are few fractures, and only sprains come but many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or folded, it is necessary that the patient cross his arms and sit upright in front of him equally; then he puts his hand on the stretched cloth, and the minister extends the broken bones, and puts them equal to each other, so that they are well joined; and put the plaster and the poultices, if abscesses do not come, then he puts a bandage according to the quantity of the place; and it is wrapped in .i. linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is around the palm of the hand, make a sphere of cloth, and instruct the patient to squeeze his broken palm; then stretch it with a long cloth, and the cast of wax should be as big as the palm of the hand, and he squeezes it, as it should be.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the back of the hand, you should put a cast on top and another one underneath the palm, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it all around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture is in one of the fingers, if it's the thumb, adjust it as needed and then straighten it; and if the fracture is in any other finger, such as the index finger or another, adjust it and bind it with the neighboring healthy finger; or you can bind them all together, moving as needed, or put a cast on top of the finger, as in the case of the thumb; take care in the restoration and in the preparation of a hot abscess, and treat any that arise, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of a broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bones of the thigh are often broken, and one can see it when they turn forward and backward; and its restoration is such that one ties a cord above the fracture, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then they both stretch their cords equally to their sides; and this is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is near the root of the thigh, then one of the ligatures should be towards the armpit, and the other ligatures below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is near the knee, then put the ligature next to the knee, and the extension down; then the surgeon should put the bone back in line with his two hands, so that it is in its natural shape, and then apply the ointment, and the bandage, unless pus comes out.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside and then return to your work and treatment; the wound is treated in this way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	You should wrap around the fracture a thick bandage doubled into two or three layers, and leave the excess, then flex the leg so that the heels come to the root of the foot, and weave a long thread between the thigh and the leg next to the knee underneath, and bring the ends of the thread up from above; then wrap around the leg and thigh with the bandage, then put splints on the fracture, and put one splint on top of the bone in the leg; then press the space between the leg and the thigh with soft pieces of cloth to make it even, then start binding firmly three turns or four over the fracture; and as you go higher above the fracture, bind less tightly; then tie the two ends of the thread that you wove between the leg and the thigh, and put three splints on top, then return under the foot to the bottom of the thread, and tighten it so that it doesn’t move out of place, then leave it like this, so that no abscess or swelling or anything else comes of it.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if something happens there, then loosen it and address what is happening, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that are sticking out, they should be removed if possible; and if not, the area should be split open and cleaned out; and the wound is treated as we have said until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thigh is broken in this way with splints, as in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, this treatment does not help the patient at all.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the hip is restored in one day, or a little less or more, according to the different complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the joint of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the joint of the knee there is little breaking, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is only a split, or a perforation, and it happens to everyone, with or without pain, and everyone feels it.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that one puts something equal to what is broken in its place, as long as it can be put together; then put on the plaster, and if necessary, put a round splint, and bind it as it should be, then follow all the instructions we have given for other fractures, such as hot abscess and similar things; then treat each accident as it needs, until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is properly called the "mustelz", and the other is called the "foscile". All injuries occur as they do in the arm, and therefore the restoration is the same as for the arm, and the procedures are all the same. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns completely inside out.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if only the small bones are broken, then it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and it is visible, and it turns inward.Et s’il est brisiez par la garniture de li gros os, si avient que on le voi, et sent dolor, et ne tornet pas; et est grant maladiz.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then achieve extension, and make it even, and tie the splints evenly; but nevertheless, if the fracture is ugly, and there are several pieces, then the extension should be less and lighter; and adjust according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, then take two wooden splints that reach from the knee to just below the break on either side of the leg; then wrap two bands around them above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, and at this point the leg should not be able to decline to the right or left, and so is well; and some administer a block under the leg that reaches from the foot up to the knee, and they place the leg upon it to prevent movement, and properly they do this in the break where there is injury; and move the leg every day to see if there is any hot abscess or other accident; and treat it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	from the break of the bones in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no break, but at times there is a break in the bones of the foot and the two bones of the little toe, and there are various dispositions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if it happens that the bones of the leg are broken, and you see the bones on top of each other, then put the patient's foot down on the ground as if he were going to walk, and then put your own foot on top of his where the bones are raised, then press them until they return to their proper place; then apply the ointment and bandages, and place a small wooden board under the leg's belly, then wrap it with cloth and other things as needed.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And after three or four days have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find that the bones are healed, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the toes are broken, treat them as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place a splint on the broken toe, according to its length, and let it be a little wider; then place under the foot that small wooden board I mentioned before, and tighten it in place. And if there are two or three, or more, broken toes, place a splint on each toe according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and tighten the board underneath the foot; and let the top of the board press firmly against the belly of the foot.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you should not forget the other things that I have said about the other fractures, since we have spoken of them; and treat each case as it deserves.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone of the shoulder
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, make her sit upright and lean forward slightly from the waist, then fill the natural wound with cotton wool, and put in as many pieces as there are; then make the woman stand up, and gently lift her back little by little, so that the cotton comes out until it reaches the entrance to the nature, and the bone will return with the cotton; and when she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated put it back in, and do this for seven days. Then the fracture will be restored, and if you wish take a lamb's bladder, attach a tube to the opening, fill the bladder with air by blowing into the tube until it is swollen inside; the nature will then return the bone; then fill it with cotton, and leave it like that for several days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the man's elbow is broken, or that of the woman, restore it as we have said for the bone of the hip; and these breaks are not hidden from him who devotes himself to its study and practice, and understands my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the break reveals in many ways the right path to restoration; understand this therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's throat and insert it into the penis; then wrap bandages around it, and leave it for three days or more, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	from breaking with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as in the thighbone or shoulderbone or similar, to be treated immediately, as the remedies we have described bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, then continue to treat the fracture in that same hour or that day, if no hot abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if painful abscesses arise, let healing await the ninth day, until the abscesses are soothed, and do not touch them on the third or fourth day, for you would bring about an evil outcome.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible underneath the uncovered chest, you should gently put it back into place with your hands, with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if extension does not work to put it back into place by hand, then reset it using this instrument made of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and the width depends on the size of the wound; and for this, the surgeon needs to hold it with a grip of three or four fingers, depending on what he requires in each case of broken bone; and it should be round and slightly thick so that it does not bend under pressure when you work on the limb, and tapered at the front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called 'elbow', because the curved head of the bone should be placed upon the visible end of the bone; and the joint is pressed together once, so that it returns and becomes even with the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle, and the instrument cannot well grasp the bone, then you must chip away at the head of the bone so that the instrument can gain purchase.Et se li os de l’ajutoire de la hainche sont brisiez, si le contremande et le ramaine ensi com il a este brisie; et li estrumens contremande l’os en une furee et li ramaine sus l’autre, tant k’il soit igal.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then cut it with an appropriate instrument, either a chisel or a saw, to your ability; then scrape away what is stuck in the bone of harshness and fine shavings.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, you may know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	So do what you can to put it back in its place, then moisten the cloth with red wine, and apply it neatly if there is swelling; and do not put any ointment or other medicine on the wound so that pus and corruption may come to it; then minister an emetic after you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and bandage all around according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not constricted by the bandage. And many times fools have done this and caused death or腐烂 on the patient; and let the constriction be gentler than other bruises.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident may come to it, as we have said, and you feel pain in the area, then do not put emetics on it; but wrap around, instead of emetics, hard rags, and tie them.Et si li chiés ou l’espaule est desaloiee, et il ne se puet demourer ains qu’il se desaloit adés et qu’il soit remies; et tu veis bien que la dislocation avient alors qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil:
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that there is pus forming on the wound, then remove what you have put on over it completely, and apply an ointment that heals wounds, such as tetrafarmacon and similar remedies.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you must loosen the limb twice a day, morning and evening, until it is healed and closed up.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And one must prepare the limbs in such a way that the bowstring moves easily downward.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they persist for many days, and it cannot be souded but keeps slipping back, know that there are tiny pieces of bone causing this, so you must probe the wound with a needle, and remove all the loose pieces that cause the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula develops, or any other form of corruption, then it should be treated according to what he says in the chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when a bone is broken and open on the limb, as in the thigh or shoulder and similar large limbs, do not treat it at all, for often death ensues; but leave it be, and perhaps it will close up after 20 or 30 days, then you may treat the wound if you can, if not, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of bruises that come over the soudure
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Many times after the healing of a fracture, especially when it is near a joint, there remains an unsightly appearance to the limb; and perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care then if the pus is fresh: apply astringent medicines like aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others, either one or all together, and mix them with styptic wine or with egg white or garlic; and place them on the wound in poultices, and hold it firmly, and do not remove for several days; then loosen it, and start another, until the inflammation is reduced; or apply a well-prepared plaster of pitch, for the nature of pitch is to remove all swelling from the limbs; if the inflammation has turned into hardness like stone, and needs to be removed, scrape off the top, and reveal the excess; or have it cut by a surgeon, so that it is removed, and healed until it is cured.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb which is weakened after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is healed, and the limb remains weak and slender, there are many causes: one is that it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many ligatures, and the limb could not receive nourishment; or due to excessive bleeding; or from too much movement, and not at the right time; or because there is little blood in the body, and so it is weakened.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat and keep the body relaxed so that blood multiplies in him; and administer bath to him, and give him joy and rest; then put pitch on the limb so that the pitch attracts to it greatly, and often wash with tepid water until the attraction goes into the limb; and return to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	[until the limb is] straight after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after healing, and the broken bone is exposed, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function; so do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb completely anew, and many fools have done this in our land; and these actions are blamed, and great harm and even death may come from them; nevertheless, if the dislocations and tortures are fresh, they should be washed with warm water, or soft herbs such as leaves of marshmallow, and roots, and melilot, and similar medicines that soften, and you make a softening plaster, such as well-prepared diaquilon, and you take the mucilage of marshmallow, and cook it with tallow of calf's skin or oil of sisament, and make a plaster to spread over it; or you take fat figs, and grind them with horse manure, and similar medicines that soften.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the dislocation is reduced by continually rubbing with moist hands for a long time.Et se li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire est brisiez, si ne le traire mie, car il porra venir en son leu; et s’il ne porresse pas adés, si avient qu’il chere par lui aprés long temp, si cure la plaie.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let motion be applied to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisting is awakened and hardened like stone, and needs to be removed with iron, then it must be cut to the bone with a subtle incision; and put cotton and study into the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	And if dislocation comes to anyone, then one must immediately reset it without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the place swells and if it is reset in its place, one must not move it at the hour that it is swollen; many times this brings on spasms and other pains; however, when this happens, let the patient be bled, then let him rest until the abscesses are calm; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each member as the cure comes into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocation from the head to the feet.
des mandibules	of the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Then the jaws are dislocated on both sides, and the dislocations of both are according to two manners: either they are a little pulled out of their places, and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, and hang down towards the feet, and saliva flows from the mouth so that he cannot hold it in, nor close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped around his speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns through various dispositions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is entire and complete, then you must reset it quickly and not tarry; and in such a way that the minister grabs the head of the patient, and puts his thumb of one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and let the other fingers be relaxed to make it equal; and instruct the patient to soften his jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And watch her until she returns to her place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the dislocation is difficult, especially when both mandibles are together, then use hot water and oil, until you reset it gently; do not try to force it back into place, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back into alignment and the mouth of the dislocation is closed well without softening, then place dampened cloths on it made from rose oil and wax, then bind it gently with soft bandages; and the patient should sleep on his back, and his head should be resting between two pillows so that he does not move to the right or left, nor should he exert himself in any way, but take light food until the pain is gone and the jaw is healed; then he can eat what he wants lightly, and not exert himself to open his mouth to eat and drink until the jaw is fully healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be reset within an hour and are not converted to their places, then fevers and usual sores come, and by chance, intestinal problems, and by chance, vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a death sentence. And many die from it within eight days.
de la forcelle	from the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The armpit cannot be dislocated within its continuance, neither on the inside nor outside; and it has been dislocated sometimes by force, and it is well felt when this happens.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back and stretches out his arms; then press the dislocated area firmly with your palm, and it will return to its place; then apply the plaster and bind it, and the shoulder joint which is near the neck cannot dislocate; if it does, and if it dislocates at any time, reset it to its place as we have said; then apply the plaster and bind it, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed; and in the same way, the shoulder is reset when it has dislocated from its socket.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: one way is that it dislocates at the bottom part near the armpit; the second is at the foot of the shoulder; and sometimes it dislocates at the top, but this rarely happens; it does not dislocate at the back or inside for the nerves; often it dislocates underneath towards the armpit, especially in those who are thin, for them it pops out violently; but for those who are stout, it pops out and goes back in slowly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men that there is a concussion or fracture, and the shoulder swells from a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	You must therefore test it until you are certain, and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And you will recognize a dislocation when it is lower down towards the armpit, and there will be a noticeable difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one; and you will find a pit at the top of the shoulder, and under the armpit at the bottom of the shoulder, it will feel like a hollow, just as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move in any way; and also, if it is dislocated at the top, it will not be hidden, for you will see it clearly at the bottom; and this type of dislocation is not difficult to fix when it is new, or when the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is for the assistant to lift the sick hand up, then place your knees under the shoulder, and pull the joint forcefully upwards in its place; and the assistant lifts the hand and extends it upwards, then places it back down; this should be done quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	If it does not return within a few days as we have said, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and they should be given a mild, soothing poultice, such as a decoction of alfalfa, fenugreek, and sweet clover in water, and they should be laid out on their back, and a pillow of wool equal in thickness, neither too soft nor too hard, should be placed under the shoulder, then the patient's heel should be placed on the pillow, and the top of the shoulder gently pulled up, and one minister should hold the head of the patient so that it does not move down; in this way, the shoulder will return immediately, and you should see to it that it is reset according to this method. You should also have a man present who is taller than the patient; he should stand opposite the patient's side, press his shoulder under the patient's armpit, and lift up the arm so that the patient hangs from it; then another minister should pull the patient's hand down toward their stomach.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	If the patient is too weak, they can be helped with something heavy, and the dislocation will return immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And it is reset in another way: a long stick is placed in the ground, so that the shoulder is as wide as the palm of the hand, and is neither too thick nor too thin; then it is placed under the patient, but with a linen cloth on top, and the patient should be standing upright; then his hand is extended downward on the other side, and the joint will return to its place immediately; and if it does not return for all these things that we have said, then this treatment is performed: take a stick two arms long and four digits wide, which has a pointed tip to easily enter under the shoulder, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then tie it onto the top of the shoulder with soft cloth so that the shoulder does not burn the patient; then place it under the joint of the patient. Extend his arm along the length of the staff, and tie the shoulder to the staff, and the arm to the tip of the hand; then place the arm on a shield four fingers wide, and extend the hand downward, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, in whatever way it is, you must put under the joint a sphere of wool equal in size, then apply the plaster prepared with flour from the mill, frankincense, and egg white, over the entire shoulder and around it; then tighten it under the joint gradually, and tie the string over the plaster, and embrace the hand to his chest, and let his hand remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And one must eat little while the limbs are being comforted, for he will heal more quickly; and then eat more after five or seven days, and move him; and if he is stiff and not softened, then he is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has come out of place because of moisture that it has acquired, or for another reason, then you must administer cauterizations to three openings, as it is described in the chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot lift his arm upward, then know that the nerves at the head of the shoulder are torn or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never return to its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocations that are towards the bottom, at the breasts, or behind, are made by pushing and stretching with the hands, and one administers them in another way; and treat it until it is healed.Li dislocation qui sont devers lou haut et les costes, si font par estendement, et li cauteres on li met a l’entour des costes sus la piere, car li nerfs sont tenduz sus la piere sus les costes, et li membres sont tenduz ou est la dislocation.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing there is aching in the limb, and with movement it becomes worse, then the patient should be bled many times until that ache is alleviated and returns to its former state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of dislocation of the neck
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You should know that the joint of the neck is dislocated with the fingers, and it goes back with the fingers; and when it is dislocated from all sides, especially from the front and behind, and the dislocation is not reduced, for one sees and feels it well, and it dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick armpit with the healthy one, then you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is crooked, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you should reset it as soon as any abscesses appear, for if the abscesses appear, it will be painful to reset; and by chance it may not be able to be fully reset all over, especially when it is at the back; so it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and death may result.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is such that when it can be reset you should extend its hand with your two hands; and its arms should be spread out, and its hands should press according to the elbow all around, forward and backward, and push at the joint of its fingers together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he bends his hand toward his hand, and pushes from the root of the palm to the elbow which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension; and that the two ministers extend the arm, and tilt it from each other, so that he does not move at the extension; then turn the arm from each side, then you have wrapped a long double cloth around it; and when the patient has joined the joint with his hand, then anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then press the joint firmly, until it returns; and when it is in place, then put on dry ointment with egg white, and press it firmly, and bind the arm to the collar of the sick person, and leave it for a few days, then loosen it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, then loosen the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not fitting well, then restart the plaster and the bandage, and leave it for some days until it is firmly in place, then loosen it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels great pain after the joint is moved back into place and it has been left alone for a day and a night, then bathe and rub it gently, and press until the pain subsides; or you can put a poultice of fatty mutton suet on the joint, leave it for another day and night, remove it, and then let him enter the bath; and when he sweats, gently rub the joint, replace the poultice, and then enter the bath again; do this two or three times until he is healed; and if you see fit, apply a warm poultice of moist cow manure mixed with butter, leave it on, and it will return to its normal state.
li dislocation de la main	dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand is healed, and the return is lighter than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be put back into place gently, at the same time that it was dislocated, as long as the joint is swollen or an abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And for the movement, put the patient's hand on a table, extend his fingers, and look at how he places his palm, so that it covers the appearance of the joint; then press it until it returns to its normal state; but you must make sure that it is in its proper place. Then have him place the back of his hand on a table for both extension and movement.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, then have the patient lie his hand flat on the table, and the surgeon place his hand over the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it now goes back into place, that is good. If not, then constrain it with a warm poultice over the abscess, and leave it thus without re-adjusting.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after several attempts, then leave the joint crooked; and do him no harm as long as his hand is swollen, and do not try to straighten anything at all: then know that the nerves are cut, or the artery; there is no other cure but to straighten it with a cautery next to the joint, and by chance nothing else will help.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, then put on the plaster that we have described, then squeeze it and leave it for five days, then loosen it and leave it like that.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is some swelling, then moisten it with warm water and rub it until it heals.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on one side or the other, sometimes on the back of the palm or on the palm; then straighten the finger and push the joint towards the dislocation, as far as it will go; then hold the top of the finger and bend it towards the part that is dislocated; and keep it like this for two days, and then straighten it that same day; and don’t bind it as we have said before, and loosen it every day, and make it move, and then rebind it at night; and do this often until it is healed; and do the same if it is dislocated on the palm, and do as you did before, until it is healed; and do the same if it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	from the dislocation of the shoulder blade from the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder blade from the back or neck is dislocated, there is no cure, for death comes quickly with this injury.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the evacuations are without voluntary effort, and he cannot hold them in, and often a limb becomes paralyzed, either both legs or both arms or one leg; and often the sciatic nerve is paralyzed in four places; when it is paralyzed in the back, it is called "gilbositez"; the cure is to find out whether the gilbositez came on in childhood: if so, there is no cure or recovery from it.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of curing it with great words are described; but they have not great benefit in all cases; but I have abbreviated them according to my understanding, and have devised instruments in diverse ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the paralysis which comes to the front foot, there is no cure or recovery; and also that which comes directly to both sides, and cannot be cured except by that which comes properly to the back, as I said; and it is so that the patient extends his face in one place evenly, and has a bandage under him, so that he does not bend; then insert a brand at the head into the ground firmly, and another at the feet; and two servants hold the bandages, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the brands; and they are tied well, the brand as we have said, and the nurse puts her palms on the spine firmly, until it recovers.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return with this cure, take a board three yards long, and dig under the wall, and let the patient lie on his side, and insert the end of the board under the wall; then place the middle of the board on the spine, and put the patient's feet on the other end of the board, and press hard until it returns to its place. And if you see fit, do this around the turn that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And you shall fix two torches at the head of the patient, one yard long, and towards the feet, two others; and there should be between each torch, above and below, a palm's width of space; and in each torch there should be an opening, where the rope runs through, and the torches are firmly planted in the ground so that they do not move; and between each pair of torches, there should be a twisting torch, over which the ropes twist, and there should be two small torches, a palm's length, on the twisting torches for turning the ropes; then tie the rope that is among the pulleys to the pulley towards the head, and the other rope to the other pulley towards the feet, and each of the ministers turns their pulley to all the rope, and the master puts the spine level as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, then put on a desiccant plaster with plenty of egg, and then the towels, and then the cast of a tablet three inches long, which purples the area of the hernia and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a ligature, as we have said, and use the patient's subtle cooling medicine until he is healed; and if anything comes in the end of health, then one must administer softening and soothing medicines, with the cast that we mentioned earlier; and sometimes they administer a piece of plaster, and sometimes the appearance comes in the lower spine in the back, and they think it is a dislocation; and it is the bone that protrudes, so one should not have any presumption about it: it might bring about death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and the shoulder only result in dislocations, and not as with other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: within and without, and before and behind; and more within, and slightly dislocated before and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, the sick one is longer, and the sick knee joint protrudes more than the healthy one, and the sick one cannot bend his knee to the fire; and the part which is nearby is swollen with a hot abscess because the head of the thigh bone has come there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the signs of those who have a discharge are contrary to those mentioned earlier.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of those who have it in front are that their leg is well according to its length; nevertheless, they cannot bend their knee without pain, and if they want to walk, they cannot, and they retain their urine, and the groin swells, and when they go, they pass over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of those who have it behind are that they cannot bend or straighten their knee, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the groin is soft, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The remedies for this type of dislocation are as follows: examine whether the dislocation is recent or old, and if it persists according to its nature, there should be no concern; and no presumptuousness should be shown.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for the one in which the dislocation is fresh and there are four types of dislocations, quickly return the joint to its place, stretching it inward and outward, moving it to the right and left; perhaps it will return to its place and require no further treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this way, then you must prepare a strong minister, and stretch the leg hard with two hands, or with one arm bound above the knee; and another minister stretches his hand over it in such a way that he presses his hands under his heels, then binds him with a rope around the thigh; and another holds his head with a rope; and they all stretch upward and downward at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground at once and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to all four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, then one must apply a splint to the affected part. When the dislocation is in the hip, you should support the patient on his healthy side, then place the rope around the root of the thigh, and the part underneath the armpit; then tighten the rope upward toward the armpit and the groin; then have another minister seize his arms and embrace the thick part of the dislocated thigh, and stretch it forcefully: thus it will return to its place at once. This method of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot pull it in the manner we have said, then you should tie the patient's two feet together with a strong rope under the two heels, and over the two knees, and let the affected leg be extended two fingers more than the other; then let him be hung by the head of a pole, and let his arms hang two lengths from the ground; then command a minister to embrace the head of the thigh, and let another minister hang with the patient, embracing the thigh firmly, for the joint will return quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is out of place, let the patient lie as we have said in the one who has lameness, and tighten the rope on the affected leg properly, and on the thigh also; then put two brands, one at the head and one at the feet, then insert the brand between the thighs of the patient in the middle; and have layers of moist cloth laid around it so that it does not burn the patient, then extend each minister toward him, and let the minister apply pressure equal to his hand on the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it goes back, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place him on a table and press him as we have said in the treatment for dislocation, and lay the patient on his healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, one should extend the affected leg gently, and according to what I have said; and the assistant should put his weight on the painful shoulder, then press with the other hand, and push it downward towards the knee.Et s’il ne veut aler, si covient le lever sus li pels de la gamba malaide, et li mires mette sa main en l’angre malaide, et presse ensi com nos avons dit; car il doit aler ou il nule point aler.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is in the hip, then one should not stretch the patient downward or raise him up from the ground, but he should remain as though his hip were dislocated on the side, as we have said about lying on both hips; and let him be on his face with the bandage stretched as we have said before, and someone should press upon the joint on the table; and when the patient stretches out his legs and they are even, then one must bring the thighs closer together and apply the ointment and constrain it with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and let him rest for three or four days, then loosen it and apply the ointment again; and if you see that they are even, then constrain it as before and leave it for three days; then loosen it and let him walk well as long as the limbs are comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	There are three ways that the knee can be dislocated: that is, inside, outside, and behind; it cannot be dislocated in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the sign is that you command the patient to bend his leg at his thigh, and if it does not stick to his thigh, then you know he is dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit up straight, and extend his leg if he can, and lay your back on his face, and put his foot on your feet; then take his knee in your palms, and pull between your fingers, then bend both sides of the knee slowly; and another minister extends his foot, so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he sticks his leg to his thigh lightly; and apply the plaster, and let the leg air-dry at the thigh, and bind them together tightly for three or four days, then loosen it; and do not have the patient walk until the limb is healed.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if there is no pain, then administer it strongly, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	Heels are sometimes dislocated, and sometimes fully dislocated, within and without.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it hurts when pressed on the affected part; the movements are weak, and one should gently stretch out the foot with their hands when it is only sprained.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is healed all over, you should make the patient sit upright, and hold his leg tightly by the ankle; then raise the foot towards your right hand, and then towards your left hand twice, then stretch it upwards, and flex it well upwards; do this twice, as we have said, by bending and stretching the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, repeat the operation, for it will return; and if it cannot return thus, make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and fix the strap firmly into the ground between his buttocks, and wind cloth around it so that he cannot bend the leg; then hold the leg tightly with one hand at the knee, and another holds the foot stretched out towards their hands or against their thigh; then stretch each hand equally, and the strap should be held firmly between the patient's buttocks to hold them in place as they are stretched; then apply the splint evenly to his hand, and another holds the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is at a point, then put the plaster and pads on top, and bind it tightly, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are above the ankle at the back, so that the ligature is not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligature softens, then tighten it; then loosen it on the third or fourth day, and the patient should start walking in four days; and if he goes before that time, it is not certain that he will not relapse.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a hot abscess comes, you must soothe it as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	of the armpits
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the arms are dislocated, they should be gently extended without force, and that is a minor matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any part of the foot, then you should make the patient sit on a flat surface or table completely upright, and put your foot on top of the affected joint, then press firmly on your foot until it returns to its place; and when it is back in place and there is nothing protruding, then put a two-legged board under the sole of the foot, then tighten it firmly, and leave it for three days, then loosen it; and let him rest until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When injury occurs with dislocation and you wish to restore it, many times the patient dies: do not be presumptuous in the treatment if you are not wise in the art or have not practiced long, and if you lack compassion and mercy; and do not be rash. Begin with hot poultices to soothe the abscess, and leave the patient in God's hand if there is no hope of recovery; but if you see a chance, then immediately bring the limb back into alignment so that the hot poultice can take effect; and once the limb is back in place, administer hot poultices to soothe the wound and treat it with drying ointments as necessary. If there are broken bones or splintered bone fragments due to the dislocation, set the bones and follow our instructions for simple fractures; and beware of rushing into treatment out of fear, as I have said, for this may cause harm according to your Creator's will, and for the safety of your soul and body.
Amen	So be it.
