O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine along with its fulfillment, and I have made the end through its explanations and through its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hands, that is to say, surgery.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of the hands is neglected in our region and is foreign to almost everyone, the knowledge has perished and been cut off, and nothing remains of it except for brief descriptions in the books of the ancients that the hands have handled.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And because of this, errors and vanities have arisen, intentions have been closed off, and knowledge has been kept at a distance.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	I think it is necessary to animate this treatise together with the order of this work according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of cautery tools, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good hand masters are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And one who engages in this must surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as long as he knows the judgment of members, and forms and conjunctions and separations of veins, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the number of bones, and the movement and of the veins moving and resting, and where their issue is located.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And because Hypocras says that what is known with the name is much, and with the work is little; and likewise in the art of the hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, beware that he does not make mistakes and harm people; just as I have seen many of those who meddle in this science and abandon it without knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish physician who cut an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries in the neck; because of which so much blood flowed out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another physician who treated a stone in the testicles of a man, and the stone was large; he took away with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if they cut it out he would surely die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another patient who had broken his leg and had an open wound, and the ignorant doctor applied a splint over the wound with a strong ligature, leaving no padding over the wound, only a bandage; and he was instructed not to remove it. Thus the leg became swollen all the way to the foot, and gangrene set in.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was summoned to come to him, and I hurried to remove the splint; and when I did so he felt no more pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	However, the gangrene was already confirmed in the limb and I could not heal it; and the gangrene continued to spread throughout the limb until it was entirely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another patient who had a large abscess that became inflamed due to the wickedness of his lord.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For when a ulcer is pure of melancholic humor, one should not touch it with iron unless it is in such a place that one can completely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And so, dear son, you need to know that manual labor is divided into two parts: there is work which carries peril in various situations, and I will demonstrate in each part of this book where there is doubt and peril.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Because of this, you should be careful, so that the foolish multitude cannot speak ill of you. Take up your arms in battle, and approach your diseases lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; leave behind terrible illnesses of great suffering; remove your weapons from what makes you doubtful, and have faith in yourself so that you may pass from this world to one of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in one of his warnings: "Do not take on a sick person's illness and become known as a fool.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medical cauteries, and it covers the head to the feet. It also includes the forms of instruments and all that is necessary for the practice.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping, wounds, the extraction of arrows, and similar things. It also includes the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is arranged from the head to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus, as we remember the work, it is necessary for me to describe the nature of aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the most extensive subject and subtle knowledge, and the secret responses; and about this, most of the wise men spoke and agreed; and I am content with a little of their words, for I am reducing the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery aids universally in all complexes where there is matter, whether there are two complexes: namely, a hot complex without matter, and a dry complex without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions, some people say that cautery is of great help; others say the opposite: that cautery does not benefit illnesses that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	Because the nature of fire is hot, it should not be treated with heat or dryness; and those who say otherwise claim that cautery aids hot and dry illnesses that originate in the bodies of humans.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	Because when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	Because I have found this to be true through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And yet we should not interfere unless those who have experienced it and who know through long usage the treatise on cauteries and the diversity of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and their outcomes and the timing; for other complexions we have no fear, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the doctors agreed and concurred about the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that cautery combines fire with secret remedies, and is of greater goodness than burning cauteries.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not harm any member except the one that is burned, and it does no harm to any other member by name.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Burning medicines pass from one member to another by drawing away, and bring illnesses of great suffering to the member; and it is possible that the fire, due to its intensity and the goodness of its substance, does not do this if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this through experimentation and through the length of service and study that I have placed in the art; and I stand on the truth of things. So I excuse myself from the length of speech, for it does not please me to take away the secret that is reserved for fire, and the quality of the work, how it heals diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating. So receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed upon when the cauteries should be performed, and chose a propitious time.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the underlying harm is removed by the aid of cautery; and especially when the cauteries are for painful conditions that are urgent and cannot wait until a more convenient time arrives, lest greater harm come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear son, as the foolish do; for a disease that is healed by cautery will not return; and they say so too; but it is not as they believe, because cauteries are not remedies that change the complexion, and dry up the humors that cause pain, and excel all other remedies in their effectiveness, and because of the virtue of their action and their lordly power.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease may return according to the complexion of the ailment and its location and its power; and they are gathered within it through the digestion of foods and similar things, unless cautery is administered where there is little superfluity and moisture, as with dental cauteries for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but that rarely happens.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine; but it is true, for they believe that cauteries are of no use after medicines have failed, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of cure in any disease and they are ineffective, then we administer cauteries, and they work.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauteries with instruments of gold cause less swelling than those of iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and its noble nature; and they said that the heat of a cautery does not cause swelling, but this is not true, as I have experienced and found in some people; and cauteries of gold are better than those of iron, just as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet when you heat an instrument of gold, you cannot tell when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down immediately; and if it is heated too much, it can be heated in the fire; and so there is little hindrance.And so I have found that cauteries with instruments of silver are better than those of gold or iron, because they are not too hot and do not cause swelling; and I have also found that cauteries with instruments of lead are very good for certain diseases and are effective.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this we use fire cautery, which we have made ready for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have arranged this chapter from the head to the feet so that the way is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	the olive-oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and coldness on the brain, and there are two reasons for its use: one is because of a disease called "soda", and the other is because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and due to numerous ailments such as dizziness, toothache, throat pain, and especially those caused by coldness, like paralysis, soda (a type of headache), apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged with a purgative medicine cleansing the head for three or four nights, depending on what the strength and age of the patient can bear; then have the head of the patient shaved.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then have him sit cross-legged in your lap, and place his hands on his thighs; afterwards, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where it will come to your two middle fingers, let it bleed then heat up the cautery, which is called "olivare", and this is how it is formed:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the spot marked with ink, and make small circles while pulling your hand down and then up again; then lift your hand gently, and examine the spot to see if you can see a tiny bone; if not, repeat the cautery until you can, as I have instructed. Afterwards, take a little salt, place it in soft cotton, and apply it to the spot; let it remain for three days; then put wet cotton soaked in butter on top; let this remain until the burns heal; then treat the wound with the ointment called  "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients say that when a wound remains open for longer, it purges more; and therefore, they advise using leeches.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some say that one should leave the cautery on so long that part of the bone is burned, and then have what is burned of the bone removed and cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one should leave the cautery on so long and press so hard that one breaks off a piece of bone as wide as a woman’s thumb, for so the humors can issue out freely; then one should leave the wound open for a long time, after which it must be cured and bound.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And I do not consider these two methods of cauterization to be good at all, except perhaps in some people where there is fear; and I think that I should leave them, for the shoulder is weakened by continuous dissolutions of nature, as we see in other members; and likewise when the shoulder of the patient is weak from nature, and the first application of cautery seems more safe and mild to me, then I use this method together with safety.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When in the whole head there is chronic pain that lasts a long time, one should use the patient's herbs and pills which are called "cochie", and head purgatives, and oils and plasters; and if they perform the cautery which we have mentioned earlier, and it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the patient is not of a cold nature and not too cold; then cauterize it under the fire cautery mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	Afterwards, cauterize each horn of the head just to the bone, as we have said before, and make a cautery in the place called "vessel"; there is a place where leeches are applied; and lighten your hand so that you do not reach the bone: the patient feels much greater pain with this cautery than with others, and I will speak of it later; and the cauteries on the horns should be finer than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	of the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain arises in the head and the disease extends to the eye, and the shoulder is purged with purifying medicines, and one has performed the other remedies that I have mentioned in the division of diseases, and all this does no good: then one should apply cauteries according to two methods, namely with a hot iron and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery with a hot iron is done thus: take a clove of garlic and remove the skin and place it on both shoulders, then make the temple where the pain is located in such a way that you can place the clove of garlic under the skin; and when it is placed, tie it tightly and leave it for 12 hours; then untie it and move away from the garlic clove, leaving the wound alone for two or three days; then place cotton soaked in butter over it until healing occurs.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the wound is healed, apply an ointment until it is completely healed; and if you see fit, use some of the burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth chapter on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The cautery of iron is done in this way.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery tool until it is red hot.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a closed fist, with a slight curve, and in the middle is a small appearance; and he puts it over the painful place, and holds his hand and twists it slightly, so that half the thickness of the heart is burned; and he removes his hand so that the artery does not burn, which is forced, and an abundance of blood flows.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	Afterwards, put cotton in wine vinegar, and put it over the place for three days; then he puts wet cotton in butter, and then heals the place with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this hemorrhoid with the cautery called "cultellare", cauterize all the point, and beware of covering the artery in this hemorrhoid which is not old.
de emigraine	of hemorrhoid
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you heal hemorrhoids as we have previously discussed in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cauteries previously mentioned in medicine and fire do not help him, then you must heat the cautery called  "cultellare" until it is white; and sign thus over the painful area a line half a finger long, and remove your hand once, and hold it so that you do not cover the artery and that it does not reach the bone; and beware of the mandible that mutates when one chews, and let the nerve have no regard for the mutation and may spasms come to the patient, and beware of blood flow from the artery when it is cut, or cutting has great fear and especially for those who are unaccustomed and inexperienced; and leave the wound open in the middle; but I will tell you how to stanch blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you the place where it opens in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the face as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery which we have spoken of in the chapter on the extraction of an artery, with the cautery that has .ij. knives; and this cautery is better than that one and more effective.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of ear pain from coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is ear pain caused by cold, and one has applied dissolving medicines and other treatments that we have discussed in the division, and the pain does not go away, then heat this cautery, which is called a «point», which has this shape:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you have pricked all around the diseased ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and then move slightly upwards from the root of the ear, where you have marked the affected area; and there should be .x. points around each ear; after treating the area until it heals.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture which should be cured by cautery is only from those that move with fluid, as we have said in the divisions of disease; and do not perform cautery on appearances that come from dryness and inflammation of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this appearance of torture that moves with fluid of idres and purges from the head, and from gargling, if it does not work, then you should cauterize the patient in 3 places: one at the root of the ear, another a little further up on the temple, and the third in the junction of the two lips; and place the cautery in the part that appears healthy, and apply the cautery to the top of the ear, just below the horn of the head, and the other on the temple as long as a thumb; and leave the cautery on until half of the skull is burnt; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the appearance of the scalpel that we have placed before, but it should be a little more slender, and the blade should be a little thicker; after curing the area as I have said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but it does not improve, and the patient has a fever, then do four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one on the place called 'vassels', as we said before; and do the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach, and let it be treated as we said before.
de litargie	of litharge
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient large purifying pills to cleanse the brain; then shave the head of the patient all over and put on the occlusion of sinapi which is written in the treatise on occlusions; and here is the way to do the cautery: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is cured thus, it is good; and if not, do three cauteries on the middle of the head, descending just to the neck, with a distance of one finger between each cautery; and cure him as the others, and if you see fit to adjust it, and the patient is suffering, do one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two horns, and cure him as before. And let the cautery be that which is called 'olivare', as I said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of coldness from the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to cleanse the head of hair and of anything else that we have mentioned before; then the doctor should cauterize inside the head and on each temple, once behind and three times on the spine of the neck; and if more is needed, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is strong, he should do four cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave it until the heart is burnt, then lift your hand; treat the wound until it heals, and use the cautery we call "olive" that we mentioned earlier.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use cautery except for those who are phlegmatic; first, the brain must be cleansed of hair and other treatments that we mentioned in the division when the patient is suffering greatly and needs medication.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot endure it, make him gargle and chew, purifying the brain often with good meats; then the king touches his head in the middle, and does .i. cautery according to what we said before, and .i. cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the ailment is forceful and painful, do cauteries as I said for those who have paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be of olive according to the manner that I said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the ailment is in an infant, do 1 subtle cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy the humours are corrupted and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with some cauteries as we said for those who have paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy the humours are inclined towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink to purify the brain, according to what is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the head of the sick person is bound with a bandage; then make a small pad well-shaped like a ring, and place it on the head; and let the patient cross their arms, and hold them tightly from all sides; then present the linen, and apply the butter of old ewe's milk; and heat gently so that they can bear it; then remove the bandage from within the head, and let it cool; and do this to the sick person once a week with good care, until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or, if you wish to cauterize him by making several small points all over the cautery tool.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This cautery method softens the brain significantly; afterwards, apply moist cotton soaked in butter and goose grease.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When awfulness first comes to the eyes through the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient a drink of something purifying for the head, and protect it from all moisture, and make him sweat in a bath several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After commanding him to look up, and having cauterized the scalp, and making two cauteries on the two temples if the branches of the artery are both there, or one if it is only one; and cover all the veins and arteries underneath the heart with the cautery, and make the cautery long according to the width of the temple; and beware of bleeding, and if you see too much blood emerging, then stop it as best you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision, the cauterization of how to stop it; and sometimes cautery or hot iron is applied underneath the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	of the body from tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When tears are old and habitual and are on the veins, or among the arteries that are on the appearance of the head outside; and one sees that it is from cold phlegmatic superfluities, then make the cautery that I said at the beginning of the eye: one cautery in the scalp, two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries with the hot iron underneath the two bones; and if there is a need for more, then cauterize bleeding on top of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	where the body weeps from within them
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient 3 eggs to drink; after that, king the head, and cauterize him in the middle of the cautery olive; and make two cauteries of the cautery called "clavilis" on the two sorcis, a little under the hair; and be careful of the artery so that you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery called  "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the membrane of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this tool, which is called 'olive'.
de coi ci est li forme:	The form of the tool is as follows:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see fit, make two cauteries on the two warts as long as the warts themselves; and do not leave off holding the paper until a third of it is burnt, according to the manner I have described.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that points to the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	At times the hairs of the eyes are reversed and point towards the eye, and cauteries are performed according to two methods: that is, by fire or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they sprout and are even, then put the patient's hand in a bucket of water; after that, draw on the paper over their eyes a figure that is as long as the myrtle leaf, and let the beginning of the sign be between the hairs; then put cotton soaked in egg white and a leech over the eye, then heat up the cautery so that it matches the shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing over the figure you drew bit by bit many times until it is burned in its place, the sign of the working of the treatment is that you see the paper retreat and the hairs rise at the tip of the eye; then lift your hand away and leave it be for 3 days. Then put cotton soaked in butter on the burn as long as the blister has healed; after which treat with ointment until it is cured.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs grow again and the paper softens, then do the cautery over that same spot again just as you did before; and if the hairs are broken off, then cauterize until the paper is lifted back to its natural level, and even, and do not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning cautery of medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make on parchment the shape of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and live charcoal, of each one-third, and grind them together well; and do this quickly so it does not cool down, then spread it over the shape you made like the myrtle leaf, and put it over the paper covering the eyes; and if the illness is in only one eye, then work on that one, and if in both, then on both; and put under the eye cotton soaked in egg white; and let the patient's hand be in a bucket of water, and put your finger showing over the medicine, and press once and move it all the time that the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for he will feel biting as from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the bite has healed, lift up the eyelid and check if you can see the membrane raised as it was by the constraint of fire or by incision; if so, that is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, apply more medicine to the area where the medicine did not take effect, until your work is even and the eyes are positioned correctly; then, apply moist cotton soaked in butter until the burns heal, after which treat the area with the ointment called 'diafenes' and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to take great care that your work does not cause any damage to the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then restart the medicine on the area that has softened from the paper properly, just as you did before; then cure it until it is healed; this is the way of the myrtle branch.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of people are diverse in size and shape, and according to this, your constraints should be adjusted; and do not deviate from the right path for one who has studied this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the treatment of a fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you are treating a fistula as we have described in the sections on diseases, and your treatments are not helping, then you must use cautery according to the following method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head in your lap; and have an assistant hold their head steady between your hands so that it does not move or nod; then soak cotton in egg white or pepper juice and apply it to the eye; next, heat the cautery which should be shaped like a tent, with one end pointed and the other blunt; although the blunt end is better for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Then press the fistula if it is open and clean it out, then dry it; and if it is closed, pierce it and draw out any fluid; next, apply the hot cautery directly to the area below the eye, holding the cautery with your hand so that your hand does not shake; place the cautery in the fat of the eye, corrupting it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery all the way to the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then restart the cautery again, and if you need to do so, and let it be for III days; after that put wet cotton in butter on it, and cure it with a drying ointment until it is healed, and if XL days pass and it is not healed, then apply a corrosive medicine as far as the bone; and treat the king according to what he comes for.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way to cauterize a fistula that some of the ancients spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	For a fistula, open the site; then insert into the opening a sharp, thin instrument made from a ram's horn:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make it the size of a split pea; and hold the instrument or your hand firmly so that the patient does not move at all, so that the molten lead does not enter their eye; and one should apply wet cotton in vinegar or awe to the eye. The lead will close the fistula's opening and heal miraculously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we have described, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, one must cut into the nail, and bring the fistula back into the body of the nail according to how it should be in its proper place.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there are cracks in the lips that are called "hairs," and especially in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have described in the sections above and the treatment does not help, then heat a small scalpel according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it quickly in the cracks until it reaches the bottom; afterwards, treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it causes swelling and rot and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in the section on treatments, but if it does not help: then you should use a cautery according to the size of the fistula; after cleaning the opening of the fistula, hold your hand steady so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it and the back side; do this once or twice after treating as we have said in the section on treatments, until it is healed; and if it is treated thus, it is good; but if not, then you must expose the site and remove the rotten bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it doesn't help, then put the patient's head in your lap; after heat the cautery which will be described below in such a way that you place a cane on the tooth; and place the hot cautery inside, holding your hand steady so that the patient feels the heat going to the root of the tooth; after lifting your hand, repeat the cautery according to your wish; then fill the patient's mouth with cold salt water, and let him gargle for an hour and spit it out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such a way the tooth which was loose is now firm, and the gums softened are restrained, and the corrupt moisture is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	from the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from coldness, or there is coldness or whiteness, and medical remedies are ineffective, then cauterization in two ways is needed: with a cautery of butter, or with a fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery with butter is such that you melt butter from milk, and the end in a spoon of iron or brass; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, moisten it in the melted butter, and apply it to the aching tooth until it cools down; do this repeatedly until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. And if you see the cotton and woolen fabric in the cold butter, apply it to the aching tooth, and hold a hot iron against it until the fire reaches the gum of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The fire cauteries are such that you take an iron or bronze rod, as thick as so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient; after heat the cautery, from which the shape will come out afterwards, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools; do this often, for the pain will be removed that day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary for the patient to fill his mouth with good butter at the beginning of this cautery, and then he should lie down; and this is the way of performing the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And you can cauterize any tooth you want, according to your ability; and this is the shape of the instrument:
des scrophules	of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula is caused by cold phlegm and moisture, and does not respond to digestion through medicine, then heat the cautery iron as described above, and use it to open the abscess once, in the place where it is needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days; and then moisten cotton with butter and apply it to the burned area until the wound is healed; afterward dress the wound with ointments and bandages until it is completely healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture overwhelms the channels of the lungs, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient must first be purged with solubilizing medicines; afterwards, they should be cauterized at the root of the throat, and you must be careful not to go too far into the throat, and do not burn the heart, but only a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards, they should receive another cautery at the joint of the neck at the top of the spine, and the cautery that is called "clavicle," for which we have given the form earlier; and treat the area as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	of the throat
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all diseases of the lungs are due to cold moistors, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is old, then do .ii cauteries on the chest in the places that are hollow; and another cautery between the .ii breasts; and use the cautery called "clavicle" according to the form described earlier.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see fit, perform cauterization at the tip with all the cauteries that are called "points," for which the form is given earlier in the disease of the ears; and the points should go as far as 30, or as far as it wraps around.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After healing the wound according to what was said before, and let the cautery be done in three turns according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for this reason cauteries are milder when you do them three times.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards soothe the patient on his back and side; then lift the heart which is within the breast with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, heat the cautery which has two knots of wool, here is its shape:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the skin until it pierces all the way through, and the figure of the cautery will be made up of four cauteries; this is why there is a cautery made with the cautery that has three nerves, so that the figures of cauterization are six cauteries; and the nerves follow the subtlety of a tent, and this is the shape of the cautery that has three nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is placed on top of this one nerve, so that there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Afterwards, put crushed herbs on the cautery; afterwards, let the patient rest and not move the limb for a long time until he is well healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, then little happens, so do the cautery on the thick part of the cautery blade, or a lot of cautery by pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	Because the joint is closed and the moisture is removed and the disease is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When colds and a lot of moisture come to the stomach and strain it against its complexion, and there are many catarrhs in him, and he is not helped by the usual treatments and cures, then the patient should be laid on his back, with his legs and arms extended.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	After that, he makes three cauteries on him: one under the heel of the foot according to the quantity of a pea, all around the cautery blade; and two cauteries on both sides so that the figure of the cauteries is at three angles, and there is space between them so that they do not touch when they bend; and the cauteries are so deep that they bleed from both parts of the heart, and the shape of the cauteries according to this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see cauterization with a large cautery inside the stomach according to this form; and whoever is afraid of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and sign on the stomach i. point according to the amount you want to go in; then cauterize with all the cautery that is called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the treatment that we have had before, until it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver has pain from cold and moisture and excessive winds, as it is removed from its natural complexion by excesses; and the patient is treated with what we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit him, then the patient must be placed on his back; and sign in 3 cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, avoiding the hypochondrium, where the ribs of man come from; and there should be a distance between each cautery equal to the thickness of a thumb; and the cauteries should be long, not pressing your hand too hard at all while cauterizing; and only half of the cautery should be burned, and the patient should lie straight on his back; and if he cannot do that, he should lie down, stretching his legs and lifting his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you wish, you may cauterize with the iron cautery if you are skillful and wise in the art, taking care not to scorch the whole body, for it would dry up entirely; and do not let it come to a boil, for that place is very delicate, and you will know by looking.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know whether it is in the tissue of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the tissue, then the pain felt by the patient is not too severe; but if it is in the membrane, then the pain is intense.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then when this treatment is applied to the veins, the patient should be made to lie on his back; then the area where the abscess is should be signed with the finger, and then the cautery which is similar in shape to a needle should be heated, so that this may be the instrument of its cure:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize with the cautery until the scrotum is burned, and go to the testicle, until all the pus is drawn out; after the cure, according to the cure of washes, until it is healed; and one must not use any caustic other than that which one has long studied in the art of medicine, and by which these diseases have sometimes been cured.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore he can safely operate, and in any case, I think it is better to leave it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	with cautery of pus
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancient physicians say that you must use cautery on a ulcer with roots of aristolochia, and in this way: take a long root of aristolochia, the largest one you can find, which is dry, and as thick and as long as your finger; moisten it in oil and heat it up in the fire, and apply 1 cautery between the Adam’s apple and the throat, and 2 small cauteries further down on the side that is under the beard; and 2 cauteries between the fifth and sixth rib, bending slightly backwards; and 1 cautery in the armpit, and another one over the stomach, and 1 between the 2 shoulders, and 2 on each side of the armpit, away from the cautery between the 2 shoulders; and do not press your hand down hard, but do it gently as when you are applying a perfume.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And some old writers say that a man should use a cautery of fire similar to a razor, heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches that abscess; and if pus is drawn out with pain, as we have said in the case of an abdominal abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this operation, there is fear or the patient may die, or a fistula may develop which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the moon with what we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not help at all, then they differ in three ways of cauterization which are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of these there is one method which is to make three cauteries, or four, by tracing according to the length of the ulcer, according to the shape of the cautery of the liver which we have described earlier; and do not press your hand down on the entire cautery, but let the patient be careful to lie on his back; and another method of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two turns, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift up the fold which is at the place of the ulcer, or the side of the ulcer towards the left, and the elevations by which you lift up the fold according to the fold, according to the length of the body, and the cautery according to the breadth of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	Afterwards you insert the two burning turns until the fold is pierced on the other side, and then pull away the cautery, and in this way there will be four. And if you wish, then cauterize throughout the cautery with three turns.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the sore has healed for a long time, and it is better than the others of the sores mentioned before.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery is not useful for an ulcer, except in the manner which is called "asclytes.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the ways we have mentioned in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then you should make 4 cauteries around the armpit, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the breast, two on the back on the spine, and one on the groin; and the cautery should be close to the bone of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	Afterwards, leave the cautery open to ooze pus for a long time, and do not cease treating the patient after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the two intentions will come together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly should be the claw we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is shown there before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of foot swelling
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and they are filled with yellow water, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; and move your hand with the cautery without turning.Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too far inside, thus close to the yellow awl, and let the cautery be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	Afterwards, make two cauteries on each leg at the base of the small toe; and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, halfway up the leg; and leave the cauteries in place for a long time without bandaging, until the water comes out; then dress it with the other dressings that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the stomach is affected by cold and moisture, so that the retaining and digestive functions of the stomach and intestines are impaired, and cannot be cured by any means of treatment, then you see the patient suffering greatly and with great virtue, you do .i. large cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken before about the cautery of the stomach; and .iiij. cauteries around the belly gently with .i. cautery knife thin, and .ij. cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moistors abundant and the patient suffering, then do cautery on the elbow, and .i. cautery on each arm, and .ij. small cauteries on the stomach besides the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	on the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are in the rectum, one or more, and are old and consist of thick cold moist corruption, and are treated as we have said by cutting them out, and cauterization is not beneficial, then do three cauteries on the spine of the back, that which is completely external under the skin, poking gently and triangulating, and do two cauteries under the stomach, and if you think that his intestines are cold, and the food does not digest, and one can see swelling in the face, then do a large cautery on the stomach as has been said before, and another on the liver, and another on the gallbladder with a long cautery; and let the cautery remain open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After healing the site until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the carnosity which is called 'thelul'
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut the thelul, heat up the cautery which looks like a razor, and then put it all ablaze on the cut thelul; and keep your hand steady so that the cautery reaches the source of the vein, from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of thelul, cauterize each one as we have said; after, cure them with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the scrotum, it will provide more relief.
de plaie mal curee	of poorly healed wounds
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, as we will relate in its place, then such a disease comes that it cannot be cured except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is a fistula and it has pus and a foul, sticky moisture, then you should probe it with a thin rod and be careful to probe as deep as the tent is long.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	Then heat the cautery that resembles a razor, and insert it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tent entered, and repeat the cautery until the pus and corruption are burned, once or twice or three times, according to its need; and be careful not to burn the nerves that are nearby, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	if the fistula goes to the bladder and intestines, then be careful of these places, and do not force it in a muscular place, and think that it is not a vein; after healing the site until it is healed, and if the place is sore, and the matter is removed for a long time, then know that the place is completely healed; and if the matter is not removed, know that the place is pierced, and the bone at the bottom is corrupted; and thus as one of those that we will say in their place.
de la maladie des reins	of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When there is pain from cold, and great windiness, and it does not take milk, then you must cauterize the kidneys on both sides with a fire- cautery as we have described before; and if we cauterize it in the middle, then there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will do more good.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then he should have a cautery on the part above the bladder where the hairs of the pubic region begin, one to the right and one to the left, and each cautery as long as a fingernail; and he also has a cautery behind on the back, or two if you need it; and the cauteries are curved in the shape described before.
de la marris	of the marrow
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marrow is cold and moist, and cannot produce a child due to corruption of the flores and late terms; and when they come, there is great pain: then you must do three cauteries around the abdomen, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries behind on the back; and the cauteries are curved, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moisture descends to the socket of the hip, and for this reason it dislocates from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and if one finds that there is pain in the joint, then you must cauterize the disease on the socket of the hip with a .i. cautery resembling a circle, and mark around the socket as it turns, so that the socket is within the circle; and the cautery should be such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not available to you, make .iij large cauteries from the olive tree, and let the cautery be as deep as all the wounds; and heal until it is better.
de la dolor de la hainche	of hip pain
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain arises in the hip joint, it is caused by coldness and moisture, and the disease is cured by what we have said in the division, but the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the disease of the gross humors with foul-smelling pills, or other good-smelling pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the cut, one should cauterize it; and there are two ways of cauterizing: using burning remedies, or fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery can be done in many ways, one of which is to cauterize the hip bone with three triangular cauteries according to this shape, and make them deep and large, with a distance of a thumb between each cautery; the cauteries should be olive-shaped. Sometimes, a cautery is made in the middle of the hip head, so there are four cauteries according to this shape:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you wish, let him be cauterized with the circular cautery that we mentioned earlier in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circle contains the whole hip, and all the thickness of the skin is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is how it is done for sciatica, when the pain stays in the hip and does not go down to the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if the pain extends to the back of the leg or near it, cauterize where he feels the pain with two cauteries at the point that is called "points". The cauteries should be small and burnt deep into the skin; and if the patient feels that the pain spreads to the ankle or near it, cauterize there with four cauteries at the "heel", on the left side a little. The cauteries should be small and burnt deep into the skin.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if necessary, do more; and if he feels that the pain is below the knee toward the thigh, then do cauterization with a flat or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauterizations so that you do not leave the cautery on so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and so that you do not cause the patient more harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	I myself have seen several people who had cautery applied to the ankle, and they left it until the leg was completely swollen, and the foot too, and all of the foot became pierced and corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a stomachache which caused his death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, perform cautery on one and then the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise men said about the cautery of the hip, whose method is here described: make the iron as big as a walnut at the tip, or a little less, and have it split into tines that are spaced the width of a finger-joint apart; there should be two tines on each end, and they should be shaped like thumbs. The handle of the iron should be well-made:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is all red and dripping, and then put it on the box of the hip that is ill, and let it be turned to the healthy side; and cauterize once with one cautery and leave it for 3 days; and then make an ointment of butter, and let the wound remain open for a long time; after the cure of the ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Al-Buqatur says that we use this cautery sparingly due to fear of its aspect, and seldom see those who employ it; yet it is a good cautery for those who can endure it, and in the place where it is applied.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	Cauteries of medicine burning if you make the instrument to interlace with the descending margin of the door, and it is made of bronze or iron with a long surface, and in its height there are 2 inches, and between each one is the quantity of the thickness of a finger; they are open on the bottom and top, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	Afterward, place the box of the hip on the patient lying on his side, and then press your hand firmly on the box of the hip; afterward, pour between the two circles of the hot pewter which is heated in the fire for a moment, and let the patient endure the heat and the scorching for an hour.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it causes biting like that of fire; and when the biting is passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip gently, and let it be so for three days, and apply butter until what is black from the scald is healed; and let it be for three days until pustules burst out; and this would be the last aid after the treatment with ointments as long as he is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, then you should do to them what you did to the hip, increasing the heat accordingly; and that is the way of the hot poultice, which I have written about in the treatise on the rectification of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take an equal amount of alkali and quicklime, grind them together, and place them in a nine-inch pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Make a small hole in the pot so that the point of a knife can fit through; and place another well-plumbed pot on top of the first pot, and add alkali and lime to it, and then pour hot water over them, until there are two inches of liquid above the powders, after you have mixed them well with your hand. Let it sit like this until water and pieces fall into the plumbed pot; then take all that liquid and pour it back over the alkali and lime as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then it is very painful and is treated with various medical procedures and cauteries on other parts of the body, because it does harm just like fire, and also with other medicines that cauterize well the hip, such as thistle-ash and soap, mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells of a treatment in which a man was cured of sciatica and leg pain, and he praises it greatly, saying that no other treatment was used, and that the man was healed immediately after this procedure, and that he then took a bath as instructed below:
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he explains how one must take litharge from the furnace while it is green and dry, and grind it with a little fat, and apply it to the hip, thigh, and leg where the pain is located, and leave it for three hours; by then the pain will no longer feel the burn.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then let him enter the bath until his body is a little warmed up, and let him enter the bed, and the pain will leave completely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such cautery medicines unless after evacuating the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's dung, it helps a lot; and the cautery should be done in the following way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take lamb's wool and grease it with old oil, and place it on the hollow between the big toe and the one next to it, which is called the sciatic nerve.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Then take dry goat's dung and place it in the fire until it turns into charcoal, and place it on the lamb's wool, and let it sit until it turns red; do this again and again, and don't stop doing so until you feel through touch that it has reached the hip and the pain is gone. This type of cautery is called "goat dung cautery.
de la dolor dou dos	of back pain
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When back pain comes from sitting or impact, or due to excessive loss of fluids, or due to similar appearances of cold matter, none of these appearances warrant cauterization except in the case that arises from the diffusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is appropriate after the patient has been cleared of foul odors or other appearances, that they are treated with a line on their back where the pain persists, with three lines signed in ink, and within each line .v. cauteries or more depending on the strength and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cautery should be performed according to the cautery which is called "poins"; and if you see fit, perform .iij. cauteries or .iiij. with the clavi-mean cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a stiff neck when they wake up, and fear; and you will find in the spine of the back and in us the appearance that comes above the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this, and you see it cured, then cauterize it with a cautery of salt according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery purifies each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery two or three lines in length, and have the points close to one another.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	Afterwards heal the site until it is healthy according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply cautery to any ulnar nerve ganglion.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain in the joints is due to moistors that are expanded throughout each member of the body, and when the pain comes from the feet, which they properly call "podagra," and when it is caused by coldness and cannot be cured by medicine, then it is cured by cautery in such a way: make the mouth of the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive oil according to this form.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is a need to prick the sole of the foot, use the entire cautery with the point.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come to the knees and other joints, and this often happens, use three or four cauteries of the olive-sized cautery on each knee, in every part; and if you need more, do more, but do not hold your hand on it longer than until the skin of the heart is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and back, administer the cautery that we have described in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the wrist for two lines; and if there remains no pain in the arms, then make points on each joint and on the back of the hand; and if the pains come to the shoulders or armpits, cauterize each part, and administer good treatment to the patient and take medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give him good treatment and purge his phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rot of the sinus
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When a hernia occurs in the groin, and the testicles descend into the scrotum which is new, then when you see it being cured, let him not eat that day; and he should use things that loosen the belly so that the feces descend from his belly. After that, make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his breath until the hernia is repaired, and bring it back into your hands, and sign over the hernia under the bone of the groin, and throughout a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery with which this form is:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it is white and bleeding.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bones to their place; and have the patient keep his hand still so that it does not return; and work the thighs for the patient, and put a cushion and a servant under each thigh, and another under the foot which holds the hands; then put the cautery on the sign all over your hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, do it again until you reach the bone; and be careful that the wound does not leak when you do the cautery so that you do not burn him; and so that the patient does not die or suffer harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to the size of their ears, and for large people also large according to their size; after three days cure the site of the cautery with butter until the scorch is removed; then cure it with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days so that the wound is well healed; and it is necessary that his clothing be loose enough so that his clothes do not chafe him when he tries to move around.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wants to get up, if a well-made bandage is applied and worn for another forty days, and he has good rest, eating and drinking little and not too much at a time, and not shouting too loudly, then he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will tell you now about the treatment for cutting on his shoulder.
de la routure dou ventre	of diarrhea
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ulcers come in other stomachs and are known, and you see that they are no longer growing, do the cautery with fire according to its quantity, and burn the third of the skin; after the cure according to what we have said; and some of the ancients say that one should cauterize it with a three-angled cautery according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first sign the site with a cut and make a line along the edge of the ulcer, and another across, and hold your hand steady throughout the entire cautery process.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and milder.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in a limb, from falling or injury, and the pain persists for a long time, and medical treatment doesn't help, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called 'point', and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb, its smallness and weakness, and its torsion and pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	if he is healed by the first cautery, that is good; if not, do another cautery on top of it, for such is the custom that it should move to the member that is nearest to it, and therefore you must do the cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	of mixing
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The diseases are sometimes helped by cautery with great ease, especially those that come from the putrefaction of humors and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	When you see it cauterized, take care if the disease is in its early stages, and it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not disappear or remain, and you doubt that the corruption will spread throughout the disease, then do five cauteries on the head: one in the middle of the head, and another towards the front at the end of the hair; and two on each side at the temples, and one behind on the nape of the neck; and hold your hand so that the cautery reaches the bone, and the scorched skin comes out so that the vapors of the thick humors can come out; and cauterize the mouth according to what is before it.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the mesh is scattered throughout; and it is lost apparently, then you must cauterize it with these cauteries that we have said before, one cautery on the head, two cauteries on the spine of the neck, six cauteries on the spine of the back, one large one on the hip bone and another in between, two cauteries on the shoulders; two cauteries on the elbows, two cauteries on the tendons of the feet, one cautery on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the back of the calf, so that you do not burn them; and sometimes make a cautery on the bone of the arm, and another one on the bone of the stomach, and one more on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that when you do more cautery, the more it helps and moves the patient; and know that the sick person does not feel any pain from cauterization as a healthy person does, because the body is already entirely corrupt.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that cauteries be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	Afterwards, cleanse the site with wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes to a member and is treated with medicine, oils, and plasters but is not healed, then cauterize the member according to its size; make the cautery slightly warm when applied to the thickness of the skin; then cure it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes cauterization is done to the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the member, and in this way the swelling is removed; and yet one should not intervene in any of this unless they are knowledgeable about the members and the exits of the nerves that move the body.
de albaras	of alder trees
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" occurs, and medical treatments are ineffective, then cauterize it with a moderately deep cautery according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed and the color changed; then treat it with a poultice of equal parts ground oats and lentils, with rosemary oil, and the blood of a blackbird and the blood of an almond tree; mix everything together and apply it, wrapped in a cloth, and leave it in place until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of sores by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a ulcer comes at first, and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with the cautery which seems like a circle, all around the edge of the ulcer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And yet the wise men say that one should also make a cautery in the middle of the ulcer; and yet it does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen this happen sometimes; and it is better that it be cauterized around the edge, with the cautery called 'circle', as we have said about many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	[a swelling that cannot subside]
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called 'adubelati', and it is slow to die because of the excess that it causes, or because of the age of the malady when it is decrepit (that is, very old), and he has little blood, or because of the time; and you see him hastening to die: then cauterize all around with many small cauteries in pricking; afterwards let it be thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing all the way through, then heat the cautery of which this is the shape:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" as long as the cautery has pierced the skin, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it throughout their body in such a way that the course of the illness is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure, until he is perfectly healed.Et si li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cure by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a burning sensation in the limbs, for it burns the limbs just as fires burn dry wood.Et si li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a place that can withstand the cautery with fire, then heat the iron cautery tools both small and large, according to what is appropriate for the location of the disease; then cauterize all around until you have reached all of the corruption, and none of it remains, so that all that is corrupted is removed.Et si li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let it be for three days, and put on the cauterized wounds soft bread mixed with oil until the burns from the fire are healed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the cure of ointments engendering heat.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that the scabs are not healing, it is good; and if not, then restart the cautery on what remains of the corrupted wounds.Et se li cauteres sont trop proches l’un de l’aultre, ou il advient que le feu attint a la chair, si doit on l’algerer ou le cautere est plus fort; et s’il ne se peut algerer, si covient les cauteres oster et remesurer.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this disease has sometimes been cured by medicine instead of fire cautery; but nonetheless fire cautery is the most effective treatment, and I have already described the cure for the medicinal agar in the division: take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of warts that come on the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that through the feet a disease called 'callus' according to our understanding arises, and is a thick, faultily formed thing which breaks the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauteries for this disease are according to two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	Namely, fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is where you heat the cautery iron as hot as a voult pencil, and it is made of good iron to the size that it can embrace the nail on all sides, and it has fine edges; afterwards, you place it hot on the nail and turn your hand around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail; and let it stay thus for three days until pus begins to ooze out; then make a poultice of crushed wild mallows with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will drop off and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the area with an ointment that promotes healing until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are turned outwards from the body, and often occur on the hands and feet, you should treat them with hot water cautery; it is done in this way: take a brass or iron needle, or a penknife, and place it over the nail and the nailbed, that is to say, warts; then place the needle so that it wraps around the entire edge of the nail, then put a little hot water on it, and hold your hand steady as you rotate the needle so that its edge comes to the root of the nail, allowing the hot water to penetrate deeply to the root. Then let the patient endure the burning sensation for an hour; then leave it as is, and it will be pulled out by its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another, until you draw out all those in the body, then cleanse them of the humors that produce pus.
li cure dou trembler	the cure for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone is shivering from coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever or other, you must do four cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spinous process; and one cautery on the penis, and one on the stomach with an olive-sized cautery; this will stop the shivering and hasten recovery from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of stinking pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes sores appear on the body as bathing sores, or foul pustules, that come from thick putrid matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary when they first appear to make a cautery on each head of the pustule: with a thin cautery made from myrtle wood, whose tip has been taken up in fire, or from a long root of aristologus, or with the lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow from that any further, but the surplusage of which they come is disrupted, and they are healed; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great blood flow from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of an abscess, or on the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very sorrowful thing to stanch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Nevertheless, when this happens to someone, you must quickly place your finger on the wound of the vein and hold it very firmly until the blood is quietened beneath your finger and no more drips out; then take some olive-wood cauteries, both large and small according to the wound and the location where the artery is cut, and heat them up; then take some salt, either large or small according to the wound, and place it on that vein where you are holding your finger, and keep the cautery there until the bleeding is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it bleeds again when you lift your finger from the wound and the cauteries are extinguished, then quickly take another one of the cauteries that is in the fire.Et s’il adons ne se pieçast pas, si met alerge sur li sans et li cautere sus li alerge, et tien toutes vos mainz sus li sans tant qu’il soit restainchiez; et si le sans vout alerge par la voinne, si li tiens sus qu’il ne se mueille.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And if it still does not stop bleeding, then put a bandage over the wound and the cautery on the bandage, and hold all your hands over the wound until it is stopped; and if the blood seeps through the wound, hold it there so that it does not move.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whomever administers a tight binding of cloth or placing hot objects on it, or similar treatments, will not benefit much if at all.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if it happens to someone and there is no surgeon or medicine available, then one should put their finger index on the wound as we have said, and apply pressure firmly on the wound and vein; and one must not move it but moisten it with cold water frequently until it is very cold so that the blood congeals, thickens, and stops; and one should prepare for what is needed in terms of cauterization and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book on wound treatment.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about all the diseases that require cauterization by fire or burning medicine, and the humors, causes, instruments, and forms of cauterizations; and I have placed that chapter from the head to the feet, and I will go in this chapter through the same path so that one may more easily find what they desire.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, my dear son, you must learn that in this chapter there is more risk and fear than in the first chapter on cauterization, and therefore greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to engage in foolishness.Car il adont maintes fois granz lesions et mort.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	There are many ways people come to be cured.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	Some come from such great distance that with the journey they easily make their illness worse, and because of the severity of their condition one must be cautious.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And from these there are those who give up and say "Wait, I am healed", yet the illness is stubborn.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	You should not give in to those who approach you with such an attitude, but rather prioritize your reputation over your desires. Do not act recklessly but wisely and cautiously, using your knowledge and experience to treat illnesses that can bring you fame and glory. Your skills will help establish your good reputation and earn you praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter by discussing chapters, according to what comes before the chapter on cauteries, which I have discussed from the head to the feet, so that you may more easily find what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Do you know that this disease often comes to children when they are born, and when the birth canal is too narrow for the child; and sometimes it comes from the cause of a prolonged pregnancy that one does not know about.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease except in children, and in all those that I have seen, death was imminent; and because of this, it seems to me that it is better to leave the treatment in several stages.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head swollen every day so that it could not support itself; and believed that the moisture had collected under the skull between the brain and the bone; and the treatment is such that if the moisture is between the brain and the bone, and the abscess is small, you should split a large opening in the middle of the head; and it should be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture flows out; and see the form of spasmile:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs that you see are the corners of the head opening from each part, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand inside, and it does not close again; then you must split the head into four incisions in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	After the incision, extract all the moisture firmly.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Afterward, he tightens the openings with bandages and powders, and applies wine and oil, leaving it thus until the fifth day; then he removes the bandage, and treats the wound by tenting and with poultices, and allows the patient to eat dry meat as long as there is moisture in the wound, until the limb is healed and comfortable.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of making an incision is to examine where the aperture of the abscess is, and the gathering of the pus; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut therefore where the abscess opens and the pus gathers, and make the incision according to what you are able; and be careful not to cut the artery, lest blood flows out and the patient dies from bleeding and loss of moisture.
de reume	of gout
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to someone that they have a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or worse, and the disease is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the best cure is cauterization with which one will cut the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you see them covered, the patient should turn his head toward you; then rub the area around the wound with a coarse cloth until the arteries become apparent; then have the patient tighten his neck all the way to the cloth; then examine where the veins are visible, and their locations are after the ears, and if they are swollen; then mark these spots, then tie both sides with a pointed bandage of two parts, so that the neck vein comes up to the bone, and this should be done on the back of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see that, push the spatulum under the artery and cut it from above, cutting as well as .ij. fingers across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, let the blood flow upwards continuously.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to feeling, then you must measure the amount of space of three fingers, then cut from there and make an incision to the bone; and what is needed of blood let out is six parts, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains over the bone with no pus, then clean away the abscess so that none remains, then strain the wound and ligate it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of emetic
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old emetic comes, and the catarrh is acute, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and ancient sores and similar things, and it is treated by various methods of medicine but none help, then we should extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extracting them is that the patient should grow the hair on his temples, and feel for the artery in the temple, for it opens easily with its beating, and is not very deep in some people who are too cold; and if it is deep, the patient should stretch his neck backward, then rub the area with a rough cloth, and apply warm water to the area until the artery opens visibly; then take the spatulum made of this material:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then skin the flesh lightly until you reach the artery, then draw it upwards with pincers, and separate it well from the tissues that are beneath in each part; and if the artery is subtle, then return it to the tip of the uncinate process, then ligate that part according to the amount of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, then the wound will not heal at all.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw the blood from 1/8 to 1/3; and if the artery is large, you should tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread so that pus does not come before the healing of the wound, and there is a steady flow of blood; then cut off the excess between the two ligatures in that same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a hot-iron cautery until it reaches the bone so that the shoulder is cut through; and this is the best method if the patient does not have a fever and he has a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cautery helps to dry up moisture; that is why it is most useful for moist wounds.Et si li artere fu grans, et la veinne en lui s’alonge, qui adonc le sans dou se fait plus fort, et le membre est par sa grandise et par son alonge en grand dan; adonc il covient que tu tornes a l’ostel et traies dou sang a .xii. ou .x. c/, jusc’a ce que li chiés soit sec ou sans dou; puis quier lo di, por ceu qu’il ne se tuit pas as nuytes.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Or it is necessary to extract the artery if it is large and lengthens within it, so that the blood flow becomes stronger and the limb is in great danger due to its size and length; then you should return to the hospital and draw off the blood by 1/4 or 1/5, until the shoulder is dry or healed; then stop for a day, so that it does not burst during sleep.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too weak, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have between the two knives a finger's width of space, and then when you have signed on both sides, and you put the hot iron on until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and they are spaced apart between the two heads because they are not joined by this cautery from end to end; and that is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes are descending from the veins that are on the top of the head, and it does not help to cure with medicine what one applies to it, and you see the face of the sick person turn red, and feel in the forehead the movement as if of trembling; and if the oil is thin and moist so that the eyelashes have fallen, and the eyelids are burned, and scalded by the heat of the tears, then this cure is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called it in the old language "cure contused", and you must do to the patient who has this disease, cut the hairs on the forehead, then make three incisions on the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and one of the incisions should be as long as two fingers directly across the forehead from top to bottom, and the other two at the sides above the eyebrows, and beware of cutting the arteries that are at the sides above the eyebrows; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two mandibles, and each incision should be about three fingers wide across the joins; and have ready a piece of sponge and soft cloth to wipe away the blood, then plug the wound with cotton on both sides where the cut is:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision which is to the temple up to the second incision; and scorch all the skin that is between the  .ij. cuts all over the cheek which is on the bone, then do the same from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then remove this plaster.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you put in the first cut the instrument which is called "cultellary", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is smooth, not sharp at all, and that is the shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the knife cutting towards the chest to the heart, and the flat side towards the bone, and cut until it reaches the middle of the incision.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And tie off all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous to what opens in the heart, and then make another cut in the middle incision to the other side; then draw out the blood equally, and express the site of the wound for the blood drawn; then place in each incision a tent made of old cotton, and put over it wet cloths soaked in wine and oil and garlic, and guard against hot abscesses coming; and on the third day loosen the ligature, and administer plenty of cold water, then treat the wound with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	from the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When someone has chronic cataracts, and you see the eyes are pale and small, and the vision is weakened, and the eyelids are burnt, and the hair falls out, and in the head there is a painful ache, and the patient sneezes; then you know by these symptoms that these matters and this cataract come from many veins, and the cure for it is to let it be, and it will be cured.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you should command the patient to hold his forehead, then make a large slit in the middle of the forehead, and another one wide enough for your finger.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begin the incision from the left temple to the right, and go as deep as the bone; keep your hand away from the nerves in the temples that control swallowing; when the bone is exposed, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, then separate the two lips of the incision and insert old cotton, and tent with linen; then apply wet bandages soaked in wine and oil, and be careful to avoid hot abscesses; when it is healed, you should rub the bone until new flesh begins to grow, then treat it with drying remedies that promote healing.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this way: take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of colophony, make an ointment from it and administer it to these wounds to promote healing throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the treatment of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of four things: grains, or an animal, or a stone from a mine, or something similar like iron; or seeds, such as beans, peas, and other similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it happens in the ear, whether a stone or something else that does not adhere to or grow in the ear, then hold the ear towards the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, then drop some violet oil or oil of assafety, and then administer an extraction; and make him sneeze with a condiment, and stop his nostrils when the sneezing comes, and place pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and let the ear be on top.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times it comes out through this treatment; and if it does not come out, then administer an extraction with small, subtle pincers, of which there is a description below:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out with the tweezers, that is good; if not, then administer extraction with a fine needle of small wire; and if it does not come out thus, then make an iron hook, and insert the tip of the hook into the ear canal firmly, and plug the area around the hook with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the hook; then pull it out forcefully, for very often it comes out thus, as we have said; and if it does not come out in this way, then take a leech, of which birds are taken, and place inside it some instrument made for this purpose, and put a little cotton around it; then press the leech onto the pebble or whatever it is, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not come out with all the things we have said, then be quick to split the ear so that an abscess and spasms come out; and the manner of splitting is that you first make the patient bleed from the head vein, and draw blood according to the measure of its virtue, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear upwards, and make a small slit in the root of the ear at the fat where it depends; and let the slit be like a crescent moon, so that you reach the pebble, then extract it according to your strength, and suck it vigorously with your mouth; and treat it until he is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is a grain which is inside and it swells up, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer .i. spatumile held gently according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and administer an incision on that spot.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think that the grains are moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many incisions; then extract it with small pincers and a suction device, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.Et si li pinceures ne puent l’aliger, si covient li mettre un cautere de feu, et le mettre sur la piere tant que li fuiez soit brulies, et li cauteres est sanz pain; car il n’a pas maint poil.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the earache therefore that falls into the ear, the patient should use a sneeze of first-quality wool and plug the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let him lie on that same ear where the ache is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	if it pops out through the skin, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	if not, then take many pieces according to the length of your finger, thin and light, and heat them in fire; and put one into the ear, and press on it from above with another piece of stone, and press another stone onto the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease doing this with stones upon stones until all the ache comes out, and thus it will come out entirely; and if you see, then take a splinter, put one end into the ear, and heat the other end in fire until the finest splinter burns; then do another piece of splinters until all the ache is gone, as we have said about the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of an object from the ear, if it is a small object like a flea or similar, treat it as we have said in the section on foreign objects; but if it is a large object that can be felt, administer extraction with tweezers; and this is the easiest thing to remove when it is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section and treatise on distillations, and the treatment does not help, then you should examine the ear in the sun; if any worms appear, then pull them out with fine tweezers, and if they do not appear, then take the shape of the canal where they are.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it is narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And insert the thinnest end of the tube into the ear according to the amount of the pain from the ailment, then suck forcefully on the bulb; do this repeatedly until all the pus comes out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not come out, then pack the ear with cotton as I have said for an abscess in the stone; and if they do not come out as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have tried for worm-cutting, and you will find them in the section on distillations; and distil your oils and medicines into the ear through this instrument, whose form is as follows:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it is made of silver or bronze with small holes below and openings above for distilling; and for pressing inside the distillation apparatus use a well-made bronze instrument for this purpose, and if you wish take a razor and wrap cotton around the tip skillfully; then pour your oil or juice, and what you want from your medicines into the canal, and let the canal be in the ear; then fill the razor with the cotton all along, and press your hand gently so that the oil is distilled into the ear; and the patient feels it inside, and let the distillation be slightly heated over fire so that it is distilled into the ear; and be careful that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the treatment of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without a hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to adults due to an abscess or pus forming within the ear, and sometimes these abscesses break through the ear, though one cannot see them; and sometimes there is only a slight defect in the hole, yet one can still hear well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, when an abscess breaks through and cannot be seen, it is a difficult healing process in various cases, and for this one, you should hold the affected ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the pus appearing, then the cure depends on how it appears.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And if it is sharp and pointed both in front and behind, so that it does not pierce the ear; if the abscess is due to pus or the body of the ear, then hold it with delicate tweezers and squeeze gently until all the pus is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the growth is deep in the ear, take a thin, light razor and heat it slightly in the fire, then apply it to the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you sense the piercing pain that the patient feels upon hearing, pierce it gently and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear. Then insert a plug into the ear according to the size of the opening and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this for several days until the wound is closed; then take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and powder it with pulverized vitriol; and if you see swelling in the ear, it is necessary to withdraw the tent and move another tent moistened with cerate made from rose oil and wax, until the swelling is reduced; then clean the wound until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if there is bleeding, plunge a sponge and some cloth in cold water, and apply it to the ear, and use other remedies that stop the flow of blood which are found in the treatises on distilling fluids.
de la char des papieres	of paper charcoal
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This ointment, when it comes on paper, moistens itself and dries up; therefore you should spread it with tweezers and pincers, and the blade of a spatulum from its roots; then put ground vitriol over the site.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if it is without skin, one should cauterize it with a subtle lenticular cautery, and after the incision the mouses return; and many times they come back, as long as something remains in their roots; but when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned up and do not return.
de la gresle	of hail
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times they come in the form of papers that look like hail in appearance and hardness, and this disease is therefore called "hail"; it is a gathering of thick moisture on top and bottom. The treatment is thus: if the hailstone moves from one side to another, it is an easy matter to know; they then open it widely, then gently peel each part, then pick it up with tweezers and scoop it out.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot scoop it out without piercing the paper, do not harm the patient; and if the crack is large, then stitch it up, and treat it until it heals. And if it is small, do not use force, for ointment will restore it immediately and heal it.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the otitis is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, reverse the paper, and grip it with pincers, and press from one side to the other; and if the paper is removed by incision, it does not matter; and when the otitis is cured, remove the pus with water, and cure the place of that which causes the pus until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a fat that is woven into the papers above it, and this happens more to children than to adults, and severely to themselves; and they get the catarrh in the mornings, and cannot bear to look at the light of the sun because tears hasten to their eyes; and because of this they lie down on their faces, and sleep upon it, and have the papers under their eyelids moistened by the inflammation and appearance covered by the exinach that appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press on the area with your fingers and feel the exinach come out between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient puts his head in yours; and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the form of a circle according to the quantity that contains exinach from each part, and then put it on him; and press with your fingers from one side to the other, so that the exinach is collected within the circle. Then cut into the moisture with the spatulum, making an incision no larger than the wound that is made in the bleeding of a vein; and in various dispositions, the exinach comes out of the incision, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Therefore, take a piece of cloth and fold it between your fingers, then turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out; and be careful not to push into the fissure so that you do not go all the way to the eye, lest you damage it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the exterior opening appears at the beginning of the fissure, then gently widen the fissure slightly so that it opens; then extract it as we have said, then moisten cloth in vinegar and water, and apply it to the site, and use a bandage.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who grind it and put it on to corrupt that moisture which has remained.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the eye until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is a hot abscess in that area, then treat it with cooling poultices until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	of the hair of papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow from papers that are not of their nature, and they become entangled, they harm themselves and cause various diseases, such as tears, softening of the paper, and albuginea, leading to the destruction of the eyes; there are four ways to treat this: by cauterization with fire, or with an aqueous medication according to what is described before the chapter on cauterization, or through incision and suturing, or with cannulae, as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You should place the patient's head on your lap, then turn the eyelid of the affected eye towards your left hand; if it turns easily, that is good; otherwise, insert an aiguille with a single thread through the margin of the eyelid where the hairs are growing, and run the thread over the entire eyelid, then turn the eyelid back to its original position; next, make an incision under the eyelid, under the abnormal hairs, cutting towards the tear duct, from the large lachrymal gland to the small one; then remove the thread and place a small tent of cotton and cloth under the eyelid; finally, apply a signet ring over the eyelid, shaped like a myrten leaf, and adjust the shape according to the amount you want to lift the divided eyelid.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if there is need to cut off a great quantity of the paper according to how soft the paper is; then mark on all the spatulas along the two lines you have marked, and start from the large nostril up to the small; and let one of the slits be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the needle into one of the two corners of the heart, then scrape off all; then sew together the two lips with a single thread of fine wool with a needle, and stop the bleeding, and dry up the excess threads on the two nostrils with any sticky substance if you wish to do so; but if not, don't worry about it, then leave the stitch and the threads for three or four days; then cure the wound without stitches using dry and compressing substances, because the paper lifts at the sudden closing of the wound and its joining, but the stitch is weakened (as the ancients say), and this work is done without fear; there is another way too: you mark the paper in a shape like the leaf of a myrtle tree, as we have described, with three branches divided according to the form that is shown here.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut what is above with small scissors evenly according to the shape which is there:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the tweezers, and the object is not even, then take a needle where there is thread, and pierce it in the middle of the figure; and pierce another thread near the large eyelash, and the second thread near the small one, and bring the threads together equally between your fingers; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin on which you have marked, as we have described, then bring the two lips of the wound together by sewing, and heal it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar soothing ointments; and sometimes the hairs of the paper are converted: so you should use what we have said about the incision; but sewing one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of the bones is as follows: you must turn the paper and place it inside according to what I have said, then make two bones by art, and two thin strings as long as the paper and the width of the spatumile; tie them with two strings into two parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above what is on top of the paper for the eye, strain the two bones from their two formed parts; leave it thus for several days, and the skin that was strained will die and harden and rot, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is slow, and the wound has force, then heal it until it is healed; and when the wound is sewn, and if the paper is lifted, and the hairs no longer weigh down; and this is the form of the two καννες that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	the operations are such that you thread a thin needle, and tie to it a fine and thin silk thread; then assemble the heads and tie them subtly together, and let the length of the threads be about the size of a palm; then prepare in the case another fine and short silk thread, and tie its ends together; then place the patient's head on your lap; and have the operation performed in the light of the sun so that it is visible, for this is a subtle and small operation; then thread the needle all the way into the paper close to the root of the hair, and draw it out through the paper gently until you draw out the natural hair; then draw your hand back so that the hairs come out straight and with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the chase is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then you will treat the chase below to the very end that you have ordered for it, until the chase comes out from the hole above and you see it with the eye of sight; therefore, then pull out the chase and the thread, and close the eye and let it heal for 2 or 3 days, until the hair grows back in its place and new flesh grows over it; and if the hair is short, accompany a long hair from the natural horses, and let it grow with that one which you leave, until it is elongated and then release it.
de la porriture de l’oil	from the inflammation of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or warts, comes to the eye, there are two ways in which it comes: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or cutting or cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the manner of treating it is to split the wart, and pry open its edges, and put in linen bandages, and keep it moist until it is healed; and you must not use in its treatment anything that would dry it out and restrict blood flow.Et si li peilz ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent, et que la soudure se fende, tu l’enleves en ta main.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And if the hairs do not move until they grow, and the wart cracks open, you can remove it with your hand.For if you do that, the disease will return worse than before; but treat it with softening things, such as fenugreek; and rosewater or aged and seed of flax are cooked, and ointments of dysosmyum melted in any of the oils, and wrap it up in a bandage, and cure it thus.Et si li peilz ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent, et que la soudure se fende, tu l’enleves en ta main.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the goal of your treatment is that you must be careful that it does not heal according to its former shape; and these works that we have said are only remedies for this disease, that it does not return according to its former shape.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This illness, which is below what is truly called "the brain", is both natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Accidents come from wounds and cuts and cauteries and similar things; the pathway of this operation is that you take a needle with a doubled thread, and pierce it through the flesh, and make it go into the left upper arm so that the thread goes into both shoulders of the body; then the body is above all the needle, and the cup to the broad spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper returns as it should be, that is good; if not, then take the razor and put it in the cut, and turn the paper, and make two cuts alongside within the paper; and let the two cuts of the two angles of the incision that you have copied, and make angles so that when they are assembled, the shape is like that of a letter which has the name "The Greek Letter"; then remove this flesh according to the quantity that its sides are stretched under the paper, from what follows the paper; then join the two separated parts, and sew them with a thread of wool; then heal it as we have said with soft medicines and bandages, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a split or sewing or cautery, then you should make a plain split under the hairs of the paper, and according to what is said above; then pull apart between the two lips of a tent, as I have said; and one should perform the operation according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters prepare instruments with all their power so that they can bring back the figure to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what they need in terms of treatment and tools, with various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	suddenly from the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this soudure happens to human beings in such a way that the paper above is separated from the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you should therefore push the tip of a scalpel under the paper and lift it up; and treat it with tweezers, so that you grasp what is open on the spatula, which is neither too pointed nor too trenchant, so that the patient cannot endure that the spatula, which is too sharp, pierces the eye; and your incision, by which you peel away this union, should be light, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and all of this union is healed, and sometimes in the eye there is a watery discharge, and it is relieved with warm water and a poultice; then place between the paper and the eye a tent made of linen, and place over the eye moist wool soaked in egg white; and after the third day, use the collar and soothing remedies until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the nail grows in two ways: it is nervy and resembles a hard cyst; and another which is not nervy but resembles white congealed moisture, so that when one touches it with iron and tries to pierce it with pincers, no one can. And both kinds begin at the large lash, and grow little by little until they cover the whole eye and all its light and movement.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of the incision is that the patient puts his head in your lap, then he opens his eyes; and hold the paper in your hand, then grab the nail with pincers of small wire, and grasp it at the top; then take a needle and thread a horsehair, or cow's hair, or ox's hair through it; and double the tip of the needle a little and push it into the nail, and pierce all the way through the needle, and tie the nail with a thread and grasp it at the top, and scrape along the side of the nail following the shape of the eyelid down to the lash line, then cut the rest at the root of the lashes to the thin edge, and leave the natural flesh of the eyelid, so that by the incision does not come the usual tear fluid; and sometimes only the nail is grasped at the lash line, and with the thread, as we have said; then scrape it all along the shape of the eyelid:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful that the eyelid does not touch the fleshy membrane and tear it, and that the lash is not pierced; and after the incision, put a little crushed chalk in the eye, and from the collar made of litarge, leave it until the next day; then treat it as needed until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot pierce it with a needle, nor can the nails enter, this kind of nail is often cured by medicine; it grows as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, then work on the eye of the patient, and take the spatule gently and pierce according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And raise the nail gently, and if you see it is not reduced and the pus still flows, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litharge and red copper ore ground fine, and stop the eye until the next day; then resume the other treatment according to this same method, until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the treatment as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh in the eyelid hurts the eye greatly, then suspend it on a needle, and cut off part of it but not all, so that no body of pus comes out; then distill into the eye red collar made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the eyeball
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Some men have red pustules that appear on their eyelids, covering the eyeball, and they are bound with bandages and return to health; they resemble a rose on a baluster. The treatment is for the patient to hold his head steady while the practitioner works on the eye, then to cut away all of the pus to the bone, using tools appropriate for this purpose, and to press down firmly. Then he cuts into the first pustule and continues cutting until it is completely removed, being careful not to damage the eyeball during the procedure. The incision should be made with a spatula as described in the section on fingernail incisions, and with gentle pressure so that the tool can be easily removed; this is shown in this chapter. When the incision is complete and all of the pus has been removed, apply an eye salve made from crushed rock crystal or similar corrosive medicines, then cover the eyeball with a pad soaked in egg white to protect it from hot abscesses. If anything remains, and if there are signs of a hot abscess, leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with cooling remedies; then return to treating the eye once it has healed. Repeat this process for each pustule that appears on the eyeball.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, you should always treat weak eyes with natural remedies and accidental injuries with iron instruments; do not insert your finger in any of these operations until you see that the patient is suffering less from the treatment.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	They are red veins that are covered over the eye, and they obscure vision and weaken the eye all day long.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	So then, first examine the eye to see if there is anything else wrong with it apart from the blood vessels; then have the patient tilt his head back and use your fingers to gently lift the eyelids, according to your skill and judgement, and make the lids themselves thin and delicate, according to this shape:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And two incisions in a .i. body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then squeeze these veins gently, and draw out the blood an hour after another, until you see the veins removed from the eye; and be careful not to hurt the eye with the points of the spatulas, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that you do not touch anything but the veins; and when you have done this, then distill into the eye green and red collyrium to corrupt what remains of the stye.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you have no power to draw them all in that hour, then make a plaster over the eye of things which ease the pain of them, and leave it for some days until the pain is eased and there is assurance of hot abscess, then begin again according to this method before it is healed; and this is the form of forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	Examine the so-called "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with cautery and fiery medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, there is an infection in it that you should lance upon the abscess, where it must remain, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and blackness, then use this instrument to scrape away the corruption; and it is called  "aspre chief" , and it should be made of iron with a pointed end as it is in the present form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place on the site of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand slightly until you feel that the corruption is gone; do this several times, then restore the site with drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the eye is swollen and pus forms, and the body of the eyelid is swollen, and it remains like this for 40 days without improving or becoming abscessed, and nothing bad happens, then you can be sure that it is healed; but if not, there is another method which is to open the fistula at the edge of the eyelid according to this shape: and you must uncover the bone a second time with iron and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered take a pair of forceps according to this shape, and have the head of the forceps be three-pointed, and make the shank thin up to the end, as you can see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then he puts it on the bone near the joint, and moves his hand away from the eye a little, then pushes the needle all the way through the bone until he feels the patient's pulse through the needle if he holds his hand over the nail; then dry up the wound with dry medicine as I have shown you, and when the flesh has healed and the holes are closed, examine the nail; then it is easier for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the exit of the eye:
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eye is completely open all around and does not cause disturbance or thinning of the nerve, then you should ligature the patient; then heal him, then place leeches or suckers without piercing to draw out the blood, then apply a poultice made of aconite, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla onto the eye, and then bind it with bandages and drapes; and the way of the drapes is that you take soft drapes, double each one into four parts, and then place one on top of the other according to the amount that the eye needs; then tighten them from above with a firm bandage, and repeat the leeches to draw out without piercing; then remove the leeches and leave the eye tightly bound day and night, and if the ligature softens, you should tighten it a lot; then remove the ligature after a day and a night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good; if not, then repeat the poultice, drapes, ligature, and leeches until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	from the breaking of a woven fabric
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in a woven fabric, then open it up and it appears like a grain of resin, and is terrible to see. Therefore, if you see it covered, the work is such that you insert a needle into the root of the part underneath up to the part above, then insert another needle where there is a double thread of the part of the eyelid; and pierce it, and leave the first needle according to its position; then cover the place of the double thread and tie one part of the fabric around, and tighten it well, then remove the needle and apply a warm egg white to the eye; and let it be until the threads cut through the fabric, then heal the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed. And sometimes the wound is restricted by the fabric on all sides in a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes give great appearance, pierce them with a subtle spatulum that comes from the bottom of the eye, and dry the moist white and lower the eyes, and enter so quickly; then pull it as long as he is healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the eye socket
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called «alcunnati» is nothing other than a lump which is formed in the eye, resembling descending water, but it is not water; and the way to recognize it is to make the patient sit upright and straight on a chair, then hold his head between your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the lump coming up to your eyes; then let it be, and darken the light, and see if the patient can see things as he used to; and if the lump does not go down under the eye, know that it is water, but if the descent of the lump is not apparent as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the spatula and cut on the corium I little by the continuation of the conjunctive with the corium and the corona, until the membrane emerges; and when it is issued, then distil into the eye warm water mixed with honey, or water or fenugreek boiled with honey, then let it be cured by another cure until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the eye waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have discussed the appearances of wounds in the division, and what is appropriate to pierce; now act according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	You should make the patient sit between your crossed hands away from sunlight and press his healthy eye firmly shut; then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eye is on the left, or in your right hand if it is on the right; then take with your right hand, if the eye is on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or with your left hand if it is on the right; then place the point of the instrument against the corona at the thickness of a hair's breadth in that white of the eye near where the tear duct is located, and push the instrument called "almagda" skillfully while turning your hand so that it pierces the white of the eye, and you will feel that almagda reaches the hollow space; and the length of the almagda should be equal to the depth of the space between the pupil and the back of the eyeball; this is the corona of the eye; then you will see the bone in the paper through the clarity of the corium, and then push the instrument in one place after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	if the patient is now experiencing pain, he sees the instrument in front of him and the wound in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting a little, and if the pain rises up the second time, push it down with the instrument, and when it is pierced through and does not rise again, gently extract the alatmaga by turning your hand a little; then put in some sea-gem water and remove the eye from that.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then insert into the eye a dampened sponge or lamb's wool in rose oil and an abundance of egg white, and bind it with clean cloth.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, put on crushed comfrey mixed with abundant egg white.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some people whose eyes are too hard, then you must take the instrument which is called  "alberit", of which this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And therefore cut through only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep, but make the cut superficial, then insert alatmaga as we have said; and at the end of the treatment prepare for the patient sleep that comes in darkness, with which he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and he should abstain from all movement, eat light foods, and not move his head to the right or left, and be tied according to his disposition for three days; then untie him in the same dark house and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then put back the bandage until the seventh day; and you should not do this during the hour of surgery or after the incision, but you must let it drain, so that the water flows out quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	if such abscesses come, that you loosen the eye before the seventh day, and receive from him who eases abscesses; and when it is appeased, then loosen the sight and put upon his face the edge of a bandage to cover some sore, and be immediately in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then leave the house a little at a time, and return to his usual state; and know that no disciple should meddle in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from Spain who said that in his land they used alum, which draws out the fluid, but I have never seen it in our land, and I have never read about it in ancient books; perhaps it is a new thing. Et quant tu vees li oilez enflatz et rouges, si li faiges .i. baume de .vi. draps de l’huile d’ole et .ii. draps de candeille verte, et li faigez une frotteure de ceu; et quant il est frotté, si le lie avec un lien de linnen blanc, et met sus la veue  .i. orilliet por covrir les oilez, et soit adés en telle maison tenebrouse. Et si li faige la frotteure par la nuict et li remette le baume au matin, et il se tienne adés jusc’a tier jor; puis deslie la veue et met sus ses oilez  .i. orilliet de linnen blanc.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of alchemy, because those who do not know them will see them; and they are properly of bronze:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let the heads of the awls have this same thinness, and let the rear ends be in four angles.
de la char sor le neis	of the heart above the diaphragm
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes there arise various swollen lumps on the body, some of which seem like scorpions with many feet; and there are others where there is a lump with a hollow center of a dark color, and another with a lump of a fair color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	With regard to these lumps which are hollow and not sunken, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; open his nostrils, and spit upon those lumps, and draw them out; then press with what you can bear using a thin spike from one side, until you know that the lump is entirely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if anything remains that cannot be covered, open it with one of the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if without swelling, or abscess, dry it as it should be; and if it is a malignant abscess, hasten and cauterize it until the blood is stanched and all the pus is removed, then pour wine or vinegar on it.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the nose works and moisture comes to the palate, you know it is healthy; and if moisture does not pass through as it should, you know there is dead flesh in the bone above, from which the instruments do not come to cut: therefore, you must put a piece of linen thread, a little thick, in his nose, with the noose of the hand, and have a space of a finger or less between each knot; and let the patient hold the end of the thread in his nose as hard as he can, and draw it through to the odorant until it comes inside the mouth; and children often do this at school, and it is an easy thing for anyone who wants to do it; then hold the head that comes from the nose in one hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth in the other hand, and pull them apart while feeling the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this until you know that the nails have corrupted the flesh, then pull out the nail, wash away the blood, and moisten the nail in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that is left of the flesh; and then put a plug of lead into the nose for a few days until it is healed, and if he needs dry medicines, then use them; and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, through which one distills oils and medicines into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	It should be made of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a tube, and it should be handled in the same way; if you want to make a closed tube, fill it with medicine to clean the head; and there should be a handle on the head to hold it while heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the heart above the diaphragm
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "telul" arises at the top of the head, and grows and becomes large, so that it is visible to the eye; therefore you must cut it at the beginning, and remove all the pus, then place the cautery or burning medicine on top; and if one delays cutting it until it becomes large, take care whether it is hard, of a dark color, and insensible: do not touch it with iron, for it is an abscess, for when it is cut once, great harm comes to the patient. And if the abscess is due to a superficial touch, and not from a dark color, and you see that one can cover it all, then evacuates the patient and cuts it without fear, and cures the place of dry and constricting things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the heart is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when a solution of continuity comes in one of these articular cartilages, it benefits little, unless in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, when this happens to someone, you should check if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then stitch together the two lips of the wound, then treat it until it is healed; and if the lips are torn on both sides, then you should scrape away all the damaged parts of their edge until they heal, then sew together the two lips of the wound, press it firmly, and powder dragon's blood over it; put a piece of strong plaster or other adhesive plaster on top of the powders, and leave it to heal by itself, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of sewing is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in sewing the belly; or with thread, as I have told you before.
des apostemes des levres	of lip abscesses
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the home remedies for lips, there are hard abscesses within the lips, resembling grains of wheat, small and large; therefore, you should split the lips and cut on each nodule with tweezers, then apply powdered vitriol to the incision, until the blood is stanched; then use an onion poultice, and treat the area with dry remedies until it heals.
de la char des gencives	of gum disease
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times a growth emerges on the gums, which the ancients call "albus". You should hold it with tweezers and cut at its root, letting the blood or pus flow; then place powdered vitriol, or other binding and drying powders, on the wound. If the growth returns after the incision, and this often happens, cut it again and cauterize it; if it does not return after cautery, that is how you treat an abscess.
des sordens	of the ears. Take a small piece of wool or linen, dip it in oil and apply it to the ear; then take another piece of linen and tie it around the head so that it pulls on the affected ear. This will cause great pain, but it will also dislodge any object stuck in the ear. If this does not work, take a pair of tweezers and try to grab hold of the object with them; if you cannot grab it firmly, cut off the end of the object that is visible and leave the rest inside. This may cause some pain but will not be as uncomfortable as having an object stuck in your ear. If the object is too deeply lodged to reach with tweezers, take a sharp knife and cut around the object, trying to grab it with the tweezers at the same time; this will help loosen it. Once you have removed the object, apply oil to soothe the pain and promote healing.
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	some are gathered at the root of the teeth, in the mouth between the gums, and they appear as ugly and rough patches; sometimes a tooth is black, green, or yellow, especially when corruption has reached the gum, and the breath of the patient smells foul; in such cases, you should make the patient hold his jaw in your hands, and with your fingers, pick at the teeth where the sores are visible, until nothing remains; and you should do the same for any discoloration, whether black, green, or yellow, until they are cleaned. If what was causing the issue is removed on the first try, that is good; if not, then repeat the process again the next day and the day after, until everything is clean. You must understand that teeth require various forms of treatment to remove sores, depending on what the condition reveals, so that the tools used to clean them differ from those used for general cleaning; these tools should be prepared and available to you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you cure a tooth of its pain that you delay drawing it as long as you can, for this must not be done hastily; for it is a very sensitive substance until one has no more excuse to pull it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then, when the patient is forced to pull, you must be careful of the tooth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain deceives the patient and he thinks it is in the tooth, so he pulls out the good tooth; and despite this, the pain does not go away until the evil is driven out, as we have already seen with these patients. So, when you are certain that it is a tooth, you should scrape around the tooth to the very gum on all sides, then move it with your fingers or with fine tweezers bit by bit, until it is well loosened; then grip tightly with the tweezers, and hold the patient's head between your knees so he doesn't move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	Then pull out the tooth carefully without breaking it, and if it won't come out, take one of these instruments and insert it into each side gently, then move it as before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the teeth are pierced and eaten, then you should fill the holes with cotton, and hold it gently with tweezers so that it does not break when being pulled; and you must work carefully around the gums to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be careful not to break it, and have a portion remain, and return to the patient with greater pain from the root than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And beware of doing as ignorant surgeons do, who in their haste and boldness sometimes break the tooth, and do not follow what we have instructed; but sometimes bring great illness through the roots that remain, or by breaking the tooth, as we have often seen. And when the tooth is pulled, wash the socket with wine or garlic and salt; and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, apply crushed vitriol to the socket; and if this does not help, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of pliers, whose teeth bite first, should have long points and thick handles so that they do not bend when you pull the tooth; and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be made of sturdy metal so that they do not bend when pulling, and made of good iron, and serrated to hold the tooth firmly.
de la racine des dens	from the tooth root
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains in place, then you must put wet cotton on it for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the area is softened, then use the pliers called "algefri", which make the shoulder look like a surgeon's mouth; and inside they are made like a file, and that is their shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots will not come out with all these tweezers, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root and put in the instrument called "althali", that is, pliers, of which this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be firm and thick so that it does not break, and if the root pops out through this, that is good; if not, then use all the instruments, of which the forms come below:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses this instrument with .ij. jaws, of which this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are before in the reason of teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large tweezers, of which this is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this instrument be so strong that it cannot break, and know that many instruments for teeth there are; and also other instruments which are not counted; and the wise subtle master finds by himself his instrument, according to what his works and the disease shows him, for he has different diseases where the ancients did not teach any instrument because of their diversity. And if it doesn't break in the carriage or other bones, or it protrudes, then he searches for the instruments that he needs, which I have told you about, and helps with gestures, from which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and strong to hold the bone so that it does not slip but can be held and removed; and then restore the place with appropriate medicines. And if there is protrusion in the bone and it is small, then treat it with this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear abnormal, contrary to the natural order of the body, and the shape is ugly, especially in young women, you should know whether the tooth is new after the tooth, and is not in the right place, and cannot be filed or ground down. Then pull it out; and if there is air with the tooth, take this instrument, whose form is like a small beak, and let it be made of iron with a sharp point:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And push it little by little into the gum for the hardness of the tooth and so that you do not move the others. And if it is apparent that it can be filed, then file it with a file like this, whose form is as follows:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and is also like the file with which needles are made; and in filing, the tooth a little bit, bit by bit, lightly, so that it does not move until it breaks; then smooth it at the end with a rasp, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, one should file off the roughness so that it is even, so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth loosen
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth becomes loose by hitting it or falling, and the patient cannot chew without hurting himself, and you have treated them with constricting medicines but nothing works; then they must be restrained with a gold wire because silver wires become green and腐烂, but gold does not move at all; and the wire should be medium thickness, not too thin nor too thick, according to the amount of space between the teeth; and if you want to pull out the teeth, take the wire and loop it around between two healthy teeth, then place the shoulder between the teeth, if there is one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then start covering again up to where you started, and gently pull your hand while bleeding, until it does not move; and the ligature should be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then clip the teeth of the file with pliers, and assemble them, and place them between the healthy tooth, and put it in such a way that it doesn't cut the tongue; and then leave it thus tightly as long as it can stay, and if it comes loose, or the wire breaks, then restrain it with another wire; let it remain and serve in this way throughout its lifetime, and this is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of the II healthy teeth, and the II bad ones, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when a tooth falls out, it is put back in its place, little by little, as we have said; and only someone who is experienced and skilled should attempt this, and sometimes a tooth made of cow bone is shaped and put in the place where there is a defect, and secured as we have described, and it remains and functions thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover the line of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Sometimes this ligament which comes under the tongue, either from nature, as one is born with it, or by accident of a wound; and the operation is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and has his head in your hand, and holds his tongue; then clip the nervous ligament with forceps, as widely as the tongue can be dislodged from its place, and if there is hardening or nodules, and this is from a sudden wound, then it pierces with forceps that ligament; and be careful that the incision is not too deep, for fear of the artery which is below; and when you have done, then raise the area with rose water and garlic, or with cold water, then put under the tongue a tent of linen; and tie the patient's mouth every night so that the wound does not heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if bleeding occurs, then place powdered vitriol on the site; and if the blood clings, then cauterize it with lente gin out, which is good for this; then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it is of a dark color or black and hard, and the patient does not feel any pain, then do not touch it, for it is a ulcer; and if it is inclined towards whiteness and there is moisture, then cut it with the knife, and open it from one side to another; and if bleeding occurs due to your treatment, apply powdered vitriol until it stops; then return to your treatment until you have removed everything; then raise the area with garlic and salt, and treat the wound with other remedies until it heals.
des apostemes de la gorge	Of abscesses in the throat:
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes bumps develop in the throat called 'godath', and they are properly called tonsils; and when you treat them as we have described in the section on tonsils, and they do not heal, then beware: if they are hard abscesses of small size and a pale color, then do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is swollen, then do not touch it with iron, also to prevent bleeding; but let it be until it is dead, and then you will split it, or it will burst on its own; and if it is a white color all around, and the root is thin, then have an instrument ready to pierce it, but first examine whether the abscess is calm and soothed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Therefore, make the patient sit facing the sun, and his head in your lap, and have him open his mouth and hold his tongue between his fingers, and press the tool under it, from which this is shaped; and it should be made of silver or thin brass like a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	As you press the tongue down with this instrument, you will see the abscess. Then take a pair of forceps and grab the abscess, pulling it up and out as far as you can; pull out any threads from the ton-sil along with it. Then cover the instrument again so that it looks like an arrowhead, and the tips are curved inwards towards each other, and very sharp, made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument available, then cover a pair of tongs so that it takes the shape described above.
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And they are sharp on one side and blunt on the other; and when you have cut one of the tonsils, cut the other in the same way, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and water and garlic, and if there is bleeding, gargle with water, or with pomegranate peels that have been cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then cure it until it heals; and sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two tonsils, so cut them then as you did the two tonsils.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, specifically a small abscess; and it had swollen up all the way to her throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the opening, which was blocked, nor eat or drink, and she would have died if she stayed like this for another day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess had become so swollen that it had pushed out two bumps from both sides of her nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I hurried then, and stuck in one hook, then pulled it out forcefully, and cut away a large portion of the abscess; then I did the same on the other side of her nose, opened her mouth wide, and pressed her tongue; afterwards, I stuck in the hook into the abscess, and scraped away some of it, and only a little blood came out; and thus the opening of her throat was cleared, and the woman began to drink water and then wine, and I continued to cut this abscess for a long time; and it would grow again and fill up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large; therefore, I lanced it inside her throat: thus it did not grow anymore; and I left these parts, and she remained there after me.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the eye descends into the socket and is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is thick and round below, it is called an "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it has been cured as we have said in the division, and the curing does not help, and you see that the abscess beneath is soothed, and it is thin; and if it is rounded together and not long, and it is blood-red or of a fuschia color or black, then you should avoid incision on it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it according to the manner that I have described, of its whiteness and length, you should cause the patient to sit before the sun, and press his tongue to the instrument of which I have spoken earlier; then insert the needle into the eye, and draw it beneath, and scrape at it with one of the two instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you must not cut away more than the superfluous tissue which is beyond the natural boundary; for if you cut away more, it will harm the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said about the incision of the two testicles, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient fears cutting, then you should use the cautery of fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The method of the cautery is for acute wounds.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient should put his head on your shoulder, and then press his tongue against the instrument that we described in the chapter on cauterization, and breathe heavily with wide-open eyes, so that it is not too thick or too thin; and use the implement of this instrument, of which here is the form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it has a stem on the end where medicine is placed, like the handle of a spoon, and you place the instrument with all the medicine on the eye; and the patient lies on his side so that saliva and mucus flow from his mouth due to the medicine inside, so that it does not go down into the throat and cause bleeding. Then hold your hand over the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour, until you see it become firm and the bites of the medicine are soothed; and if you see anything, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument all the way into the cotton on top, so that the cotton adheres to the eye; and do this frequently until the cautery is complete, then leave it to dry and fall off after 4 or 5 days. And if you need to renew the cautery with medicine, do so, and after cauterization, wash around the eye with cold water, and treat it with gargarisms until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is safer than incision or cautery; if it is cured by fumigation according to this method, take calamine and hyssop and marjoram and rue and chamomile and avens and similar herbs, and put all or some of them into a pot, and add garlic, and let it boil; the pot should be well-glazed with strong clay, and the end of the instrument should be chewed according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	It should be made of silver or bronze, and one of the ends should be placed in the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the eye through the canal, until the eye is deadened; then repeat it often, until the eye dries up, and take care not to do this at the beginning of a hot abscess, for many things can happen there; nor should you do this beyond the decline of a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	If this instrument is not present, take a cane and put an egg inside the end, so that the mouth of the patient is not too hot; for the egg will not let the vapor burden the mouth, and it is a good remedy together with salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times a bone or fish spine, or some object, becomes lodged in the throat; therefore you must pull out what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all your strength, so that you move the object; and if it does not appear to you and is stuck in the throat, you should make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps the object will come out through vomiting. Or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a dry piece of bread; and tie a thread to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it reaches the place, it will lodge there, and then you can pull it out; and if it does not come out in the way we have said, take an instrument made of lead according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And the instrument should be curved at the end so that it can more easily enter the throat, and the end should be raised upward; and take care not to touch the epiglottis so that its wall does not tear, nor push the bone inside; and move it so that the patient swallows the instrument, so that he moves where the object is lodged; then he swallows it downward, or pulls it out with the entire instrument equally, until it comes out.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the phlegm of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Sometimes the blood is bled, as I have said in the division, by the remedy of medicines; and when this does not help, then look into the throat of the patient towards the sun, then press his tongue with the instrument that I have told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the blood, draw it out a little bit at a time with a small hook, or with delicate tweezers that are suitable for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, take a heated cane, and put it into the throat of the patient, then put the hot end of the cane into the wound, and do this frequently.Et se cest instrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient has a fever all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it in without swallowing, moving their hand often; as soon as the water reaches the throat, they will spit.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not spit as we have said, then smoke the patient with assafetida, using the instrument I described for smoking the throat; do this many times, for it will spit without gagging.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the method of the smoking is that you heat the pot with live coals, and it has a lid pierced in the middle, and in that hole is placed the head of the instrument; then pour your smoking mixture, and the patient puts their throat into their mouth, closing their mouth so that no smoke escapes, but comes to the back of the throat; and soon the mucus will come out, and if it does not, repeat the smoking many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, eating salted and sour things, and drink nothing; and then it is necessary that they pass water.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument used to draw out the phlegm, when one can see it, is similar to bent tweezers so that they can enter the throat; and it is like a pair of forceps, and it has roughness from lime, so that what it grabs it cannot let go; and see here the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	There are many types of abscesses, according to what the memory brings us hereafter, from one and another in this book, and they differ in penetration and size; and there are two kinds, one in its appearance itself, and in what it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second kind is due to their location in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and the abscesses of fleshy places are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own treatment in practice.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if there are abscesses that one must not pierce until the bowels are dead according to their fulfillment; and there are some that one must pierce when they become crusty, and they do not die according to their fulfillment, like abscesses that are near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near joints, and one leaves it as long as it is soft all around, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb.Et si a apostemes qui sont entre le bowe et le corps, et li bowe ne doivent mie etre mort, si convient qu’on les percere tant que il sont charnuz, car si on les laisse porris et corrumputz, si causent grant mal; et si convient qu’on leve li semblant de la peau par la percier, tant qu’il ne se fust corrumpt.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Where the abscess is near the main member, if you delay piercing it until it has ripened, it will harm the main member; and if it is near the foundation, one should pierce it so that it may drain and not burst, and become prolonged inside, and cause a fistula, and not heal for a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you should know the time of piercing the abscess which is dead according to its fullness, and that is when the pain has subsided, and the departure of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and the softening and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and you should make the piercing in the most dependent place of the abscess, and where it appears soft; and the piercing should be deep in the body, and if the abscesses are on the hands or feet, or in joints and on nerves and arteries, and in all places equally where there is no fold.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those who bend, according to which member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to let the piercing alone until it has ripened and the digestion is complete, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it earlier, the body will be filled with venom from it, and it will be full of dirt, and perhaps the lips and its depths will harden.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is any abscess that are pierced according to the breadth of the body, according to what the members need.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you must treat small abscesses with small incisions, and large abscesses with large incisions, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses that one should slice open the skin, and cover it up; when they have become like leather, and died down, then you must do as one does with blisters. And some are split into three angles, and some are covered as one covers a myrtle branch; and some abscesses of the fingers are treated in this way: one makes an incision all around, and drains it, and covers it up.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who do not have a head, like a superficial abscess, one must pierce it directly; and when the abscess is large, and has collected a lot of pus, and you pierce it, you should not draw out all the pus at once in that hour, but only a part; then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out some more; do this repeatedly as the abscess increases, until all the pus is drained out; this method is especially suitable for patients of weak constitution, or pregnant women, or young children, or old men.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the experienced sometimes jump out of their bowels, which by chance kill the patient, and you do not realize it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, wash the wound, and look to see if the abscess wound is small; and if it is a plain cut, then apply tents made of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many holes in it, then you must place a tent in each one so that they press against each other; and if you have cut into the skin of the abscess and wrapped it around, then you must fill it with dry cotton or razor shavings from linen without moisture, and leave it for a third of a day; then remove it and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs due to your work, administer cold water and ease the area with wet cloths, and place them over the bleeding site many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding persists, administer treatment and care, and use the powders I mentioned earlier in this book. If it is winter, and the area is very nervous, you should apply warm tents and wet cloths soaked in wine and oil; but if it is summer, and the area is fleshy, you should apply wet cloths soaked in water, or in cold wine and oil for about a day, as we have said. Then, cut open the abscess, wash and clean it, and care for it as needed until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And now I will briefly discuss the treatment of abscesses: earlier I described how one should approach treating abscesses, and you can find that discussion in this chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	From the head come small abscesses, which are common in people who wear hats, like the hairline of a woman, and there are many variations of these.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fatty and soft where there is moisture as well as pulses; and there are some that are hard and stony in texture, and there is no doubt if the artery does not cause opposition.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the stomach is that you should test with every instrument called a "scoop", from which the shape comes afterwards, whatever it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, they will release it from above the length.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is discharged, they scorch without leaving the skin that contains the moisture, for it will return as soon as something is left behind; then plunge cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and those who remain overnight will heal.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then recommence the cotton, as before, on the second and third day, until you know well that it does not stay overnight; then cure the wound with ointment accordingly, until it heals.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds a lot of pus, cut it according to this form, from top to bottom; and squeeze your fingers, and scrape off all around, and put all your treatment in drawing out the pus under the skin where he lies; and if the artery does the opposite, do what I told you after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do with the abscess if it is piercing, and cut and cure as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the incision on the piercing abscess and the moist, is lighter, because they are with a little blood.And li taille sus l'aposteme est legier, car il son de poc de sang.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if any of these abscesses are on the head or a place without moisture, and among them were the abscesses which I copied on the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and could not be crushed; and if anyone had broken it, it would have caused a wound like a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	For other abscesses coming on the head, except those which come on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should be in the most dependent location, to let the pus flow out; and treat them as they should be.
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times abscesses come on the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come elsewhere in the body, and are large, and are intertwined with each other.And if any of these abscesses are on the head or a place without moisture, and among them were the abscesses which I copied on the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and could not be crushed; and if anyone had broken it, it would have caused a wound like a stone.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly inside its coat, as with the nodule and abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many similarities among these scrofulae.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are some malignant ones that do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	For those, therefore, that you see are of good disposition for cauterization, and resemble the color of the body, and are not swollen on any side, and do not press on the nerves of the neck or the artery or the duct, and are not deep; you should cover them from above, and scorch each part, and let the two lips of the wound be pressed together, if necessary, as we have said regarding abscesses of the head; and draw it a little at a time, and be careful that you do not cover the nerve or vein, and do not use the spatulum or a knife too aggressively, so that the hand does not slip, and do not go too far, so that you do not cover what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you close the vein or artery and it does not let you work, put vitriol powder in the wound, or any powders that stanch blood, and bind the wound tightly; and leave it until the abscess is subdued, and the wound softens and begins to suppurate.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound is healed, return to your work, until you finish it; then examine with your finger if there are any small scrofulous nodules remaining, cut them out and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrofula, you must not cut that scrofula at its root, but ligature it with a strong double thread, and let it hang without harm; then pack the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut away the whole scrofula, you must bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now, since there is no longer any superfluity due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	you should proceed to cut away at its root, and pull it out, and then sew it up as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofulas that hold superfluity, pierce where it appears to be dying; and pierce in the same way as previously described, letting it hang down, then apply bandages with ointment and similar things so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is clean, cure it with ointment by bandaging it, until it is healed.
de squinance	of squinting
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancient wrote and spoke of the surgery of the throat; but I have never seen anyone in our land who did it, and this is a transcript of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have squinting, it is necessary for the membrane in the throat called the "epiglottis" to be incised; and this should be done with a cautery, because all the veins and the pons of the malady are located in those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both armpits.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the malady is in the canal of the pons, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent asphyxiation due to strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we want to split the epiglottis, we should split it below three or four small splits, between the two circles or according to the amount of the split in the soft palate; and those places which are suitable for the division of the epiglottis so that there is no meat, and the vessels are long from within.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	If the throat is cut from the Adam's apple to the back of the jaw, then split the windpipe so that it reaches the tongue; avoid the blood vessels if you see any, and then close the wound as we have said. This will be demonstrated by the flow of blood from the tongue which will exit through the hole that was created, and also by the loss of voice; leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour is passed of which one doubts strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound from the heart, and stitch it up all the way to the cartilage; then administer medicines that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Al-Bukhtishi says to do this only until the throat is completely blocked and the patient is judged to be dead and the deficiency of the liver.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then close the epiglottis so that the patient cannot choke, and he will breathe through the wound, thus avoiding death. And therefore, the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the virulence of the disease passed, which usually took 3 or 4 days. Then they commanded to sew up the wound and apply a poultice until it healed; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw a young maiden take a knife and stab herself in the throat, slicing open her windpipe; I was called to heal her, and found her as good as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I exposed the wound and found that blood had flowed out of it, and that she had not coughed up any blood or phlegm, and the blood had issued through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened and sewed up the wound and healed her until she recovered; the maiden's voice was hoarse, but she soon returned to her senses; thus I say that one should not fear cutting into the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called a "gorge hernia", and it is a large abscess the color of slate, and it occurs often in women; there are two types: natural and accidental; a natural hernia has no cause.Accidental hernias occur when something blocks the throat, such as a fish bone or a piece of meat.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental type occurs in two ways: one resembles a cyst, and the other is like an abscess that arises from an artery; there is risk involved, but it can be treated if it is small, by pressing on it and searching throughout the entire entrance: if you find it to be similar to a cyst, and it cannot be removed, cut it out as one would cut out a cyst, and remove all of its coat, if there is none; then examine carefully and heal it as it should be, until it is completely healed.But if it resembles an abscess that comes from an artery, treat it as such, and cauterize it with a hot iron until it stops bleeding.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways to do this, all of which I will describe, and now I must explain the difference between a dislocation and an issue.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that issue is when there is a fever and heat, until the crisis has passed and the discharge is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With a nout there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body; it starts like a boil and becomes large. There are two types, one dry and the other moist, and they vary in color as I have described in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the ulcer, that you first test and examine it with the instrument called "encompass", according to how its shape appears in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the method of inquiring into abscesses is to squeeze the most moist part that you find in the abscess, and twist your fingers slightly until you feel that the pus has broken through the skin, then according to the size of the abscess; then extract the pus, and be careful not to push it further in.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the pus is thick, whatever color it has, treat it as I have described for other abscesses; and if after you extract the pus, none comes out, know that it is dry, so cut it in a cross shape and grab it with tweezers and lightly scrape each side to draw out the cotto or pus sac underneath until it is clean. If you cannot clean it all at once, treat it in sections so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if it stays for a long time, the nose will return many times; and if it stays for a little while and does not hurt you, then apply some corrosive powders to the wound and constrict the wound, and put hot poultices on the abscess, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed; and if the nose is large, cut the two lips of the wound, and treat it with what reduces swelling.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein is throbbing, or if something else is wrong, then use powdered vitriol and leave it on for two or three days until the wound suppurates and the bleeding stops; then return to treating it as before.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of the trocar, which come in three types: large, medium, and small; and there are three types of tip, called "albaret", one called "breb", and there are also three types: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the aperture of the abscess; they are like needles used to pierce sorcerers' marks, made of brass, iron, or silver, but the yellow ones are best, and are most proven with black pitch for treating fistula; and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the aperture.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of warts are very varied, as you can see: large, medium, and small; and there are warts with two curves in three ways; and there are warts with three curves, and they are also in three ways; and there are warts with two curves, and warts with only one curve, and they are in three ways; and all of these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The tips of these instruments are sharp, and there are some that only cut one side, so that the vein or nerve is not cut; and with these intrusions, the blisters are released in the limbs, so that the patient does not perceive it when opening abscesses; and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you can see; and we do not use them except in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar places; and sometimes another small instrument is made, resembling slices of wood, according to this form, with which one stops bleeding.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and sometimes it is applied to the place that heals by cutting the veins, and the arteries, and sometimes they heal according to this great shape:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the nipples of some men swell when they become corrupted, so that they resemble women's nipples; and remain ugly and swollen, and if anyone wants to cure them, he must apply ointment according to this recipe from line b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	then scrape away the fat, and fill the wound with ointment, then stitch together the two lips of the wound, and heal it until it is cured; and if the nipple sinks down and becomes soft due to its size, as happens to women, then make two slits at the top, so that one lip is attached to the other at the end of each slit, ensuring that the longer line contains the shorter according to this shape, from line b to g; then scrape away the skin between the two lips, remove the fat, and apply the ointment we mentioned, as well as any other necessary treatment for healing, until it is cured; but if it is not cured, or the incision is not completely closed due to the patient's discomfort or bleeding, you must fill the wound with moist cotton and corrosive ointment, leaving it until it absorbs the remaining fat and heals the wound.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses from arrow wounds
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come underneath the armpits are types of hard scrofula where there are nodules and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture therefore should be cut according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus within the abscess has been drained, fill the wound with clean cotton, and leave it until the next day. Then remove all the cotton and treat the wound with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is like scrofula, they should be treated as we have described for fissures of scrofula. If the wound becomes pus-filled, then apply cautery as we have described earlier.
de la routure de l’artere	of bleeding from the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is swollen and the skin on top is tight, this often causes an abscess, and likewise there is swelling and abscess in the vein; and one can recognize it when it is due to the artery, as the abscesses are long and deep; and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel a tugging; and when it is due to a vein, there is a hard lump beneath the skin; and it is foolishness to cover this abscess, especially when it is below the breast and under the armpit and in the neck and many other places, as it is very serious.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore one must avoid the cautery of iron, and if it is on the neck, one should also avoid cauterizing the head; and when it is swelling due to an artery under the skin, cut through the skin along the length of the artery; then open the artery from its origin, and carefully separate the artery from the surrounding tissue until it is exposed; then insert a needle underneath the skin where the artery is located, and pierce all the way through to the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two places according to what I taught you regarding the extraction of the two arteries in the temples; then puncture the area between the two threads with an instrument so that the blood inside flows out, and the abscess is relieved; then apply a poultice made of warm wine and oil, and treat it with bandages and ointments until it heals; and if the abscess is due to a vein, one should take some of the pus from the abscess and smear it all over the skin, then insert a needle underneath where he is holding the pus in his hand, and pierce through to the other side, and tie a double thread to the needle so that you can pull it through; then bind the abscess as I instructed, at either of the two ends of the thread; and if one doubts that the thread will hold, insert another needle at the same place through both threads underneath the entire abscess, and tie the threads in four places; then lance the abscess so that the pus flows out, then lance the skin and leave what is bound; then apply a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil, and treat it with bandages and ointments until it heals.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, as abscesses come to the artery and vein, so they come to the nerves when they are injured or through excessive labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often in the shoulders and elbows and all over where there are joints, and it is a painful abscess, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in various conditions without pain; and when one presses it firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not deep in the body, but under the skin; and it is mute in all parts, and does not go forward or backward, or downward or upward, and that which is in joints should not be covered with iron: otherwise there might be contraction; and that which is on the head or forehead, treat with a plaster.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and squeeze it at its root; and if it is large, pierce it with an awl, and scrape it, then cut out the wound and sew it up, and let it heal.
des grosses boces pendans	of large bumps hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	At times they appear in the belly and nowhere else; it is a disease called "fungus" because of its resemblance to ears, with thin roots and thick leaves. There are small ones and very large ones; I saw a man who had two on his belly that looked more like fungi than anything else, without any difference, white in color, with fine roots, and split open, from which moisture flowed.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I cut them and found one weighing 18 ounces and the other 6, and the treatment for the incision is such that you examine whether the disease is moist, and the color of the arthrous is white and moist with fine roots; then cut with a spatulum widely, and have at hand the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For often there is excessive bleeding when cutting, and if the blood flows, then hurry to cauterize it; and if you see that the disease is terrified and fearful of the iron incision, take a well-prepared piece of plaster, and cover the arthrous as we have said, and leave it for two days; then restrain it, and do not stop squeezing the plaster until he cuts the arthrous, and pieces come out through it without effort; and if the roots are thick, then be careful about cutting them directly on the belly, but you can certainly cut half of it, then cauterize so that it does not return; then cure the wound, and beware of covering the belly which is of a pale color and of poor sense and of milky aspect.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of the ulcer next.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil bursts
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the boil comes from a cautery on a wound or from a fissure in the syphilis, and it is on the belly and some of the bowels, as happens with other sores, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is mentioned earlier, or from flatulence; and if it is from the fissure of the syphilis and from the discharge of the bowel, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and opens with varied discharges.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is through the intestinal opening, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it with their fingers, it pops back out, and then it comes back in, and sometimes it is serrated, and grows larger at the entrance of the anus due to strong effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a minor issue and opens easily when you press it with your hand, and does not constrict; and if it is due to blood, then the abscesses are large and firm, and are fixed according to a quantity; and if it is due to flatulence, then there is swelling on touching, and the work involves checking whether the appearance is due to arterial or venous blood, or flatulence.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you need to let the wound heal.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is in the intestine or the bladder, then you should tell the patient to tighten his belt and stretch out straight, then sign all around the stomach; then command him to lie still between your hands, then go around the area that you have marked on the scrotum, then open up half of the abscess at the top by the large nail; then tie it tightly all around with a strong thread or strong silk string, and let the patient's testicles hang free; then open up half of the abscess stretched out over the string, and insert your finger, and feel for the intestine; if you find it caught in the string, loosen it and pull the intestine out from inside the body; and if you find the bladder, catch it at the nail and cut away the excess; and if the artery or vein acts contrary, go about your business and take two needles, and thread two strong pieces of thread through them, and pierce what you have made in a cross so that you can create an opening; then pull out the abscess in four places using the needles, and if you see anything, remove the needles and leave the area alone so that it may drain, and cut away the dead flesh when it becomes soft and drained, then treat the wound as we have said; and draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the area as needed, and sew it up.
dou chancre	of sores
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have already discussed the types of sores, how to treat them with medicine, and how to avoid using iron in the treatment. Now let us speak of sores that occur in the mouth, and great care must be taken in treating them. The ancients say that when a sore is in a place where it can be easily reached, as in the breast, armpit, or similar areas, it should be completely removed at the beginning. However, if the sore is large and old, you should not touch it, for I have never seen one healed, nor has anyone else before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the sore is in a place that can be easily reached, as we have said, the treatment is to first purging the patient of black bile; then let the wound bleed if it shows signs of repletion; then clean the wound and cut away the dead tissue from around the sore; then stop any bleeding with cauterization; finally, treat the wound further until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already discussed in the division the appearances of dropsy, and how the gathering of water occurs, and the signs of each appearance, and the treatment that is carried out by medicine, and that which is cured by iron; only this is clarified: one should not use iron for these two appearances: namely, tympanites and yposarche, as it is a deadly matter. Therefore, when you treat this appearance of dropsy called 'eclites' with medicine, and the cure does not help, then consider if the patient is weak, or if they have another illness besides dropsy, such as stomach problems and similar conditions; in this case, do not use iron, as there is a risk involved. But if you see that the patient is of strong constitution, and they only have dropsy without any other illness, and they are not too young or too old, then you should proceed as follows: raise the patient upright on your hands, and press their belly to force the water to the lowest part of the feet, then take the spiny spathumile according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And take two parts of the powder.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Take a pointed instrument, and make sure it is not so sharp that it pierces all the way through to the intestines when inserted, nor so blunt that it does not penetrate; then examine if the hydrops is located near the intestines. If it is due to a liver ailment, make your incision on the left side of the belly three fingers below the nipple; and if it is due to a lung issue, make the incision on the right side. It is important that the patient does not lie on the incision so that the fluids do not flow towards the affected area. Then, pierce through the skin with your instrument, insert the tube, and lift your hand as you would when skinning an animal to the thickness of a fingernail or an inch all around; then pierce the chest wall until the fluid comes out at the desired location, which is where the water is located. Then, pull out the tube and insert your instrument again to remove any excess fluid.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	It resembles a silver-tipped cane, made of lightweight bronze or brass, with a small hole in the lower part. On one side there are three holes, on another two, on another one, and on the last side, one; the head is shaped like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes make when cutting a quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	at the top is the outlet, so that when the instrument comes to a boil, it releases immediately onto the instrument; empty half or a third of it, because if you empty more than it needs in that hour, the patient may die from the shock of the liquid, or he may faint or approach death; but empty according to the quantity of its strength, and according to what the dispositions of the illness indicate, and his pulses; then withdraw the instrument and hold back the liquid, which is now retained by the membrane that blocks the hole above the syphon, about which I have spoken, and pierce it according to this method; then reintroduce the instrument the next day if you see the patient can bear it, and withdraw a little liquid; do this every day, and be careful not to overdo it as long as there is even a little liquid left.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt the disease, and leave it for a long time with much water, and treat it with hot sand or ash, and with sweat or bath, and in the sun, and if he becomes thirsty; and treat it with desiccation medicines until he is healed, and cauterize the stomach and liver and spleen after extracting the fluid, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	from the congestion of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born without a foreskin, or with a small one, or it is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If necessary, cut it open immediately with a very sharp spatula according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then put a thin plug of wax in the foreskin and hold it there for three or four days, and when he wants to urinate, remove the plug, and he will urinate, and then replace it; and sometimes it is not necessary, because the urine that comes out pushes the foreskin open.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those whose orifices are small, if they are medicated with lead plaster as we have said, will be enlarged.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have an orifice in their place are blocked. Some are born with an orifice at the head of the penis, which prevents them from urinating unless they lift their penis upwards; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot reach the urethra, and this is a serious condition.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, then the head of the penis and foreskin are cut to the size of a feather, so that the incision falls in the middle, as it should be; and take care to prevent bleeding which often occurs, and if it does happen, then stop the flow of blood with a cautery, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these blisters come on the penis, and it is an unsightly appearance of pus; and there are harmful and harmless ones; therefore you should lance them with a very sharp knife, and clean and dry them thoroughly, then apply cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then treat it with fine ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, discolored and foul-smelling, then you should apply a cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cut it, and if the ulcer is on the shaft of the penis, and part of it is inside and part outside, then you must first remove the ulcer that is inside; and when it is healed, treat the external portion.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it together, if the foreskin is not assured so that it is not pierced, and blackness and corruption come in his penis and scrotum; then everything that is black and corrupt should be cut away, then bind on the ointment of honey and flour made from pomegranate peel and walnuts, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if there is bleeding, apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauteries have two uses together: that is, for bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, you must tie a string around the penis and let the patient urinate through it; and when the skin becomes sore at the tip of the penis due to an injury or an abscess, you should then cut it with an instrument, as long as the foreskin is loose and released from all sides, and if it is painful to discuss this, you should cut it with a spatulum at some point on the head of the penis and the glans; then separate them gently, and place a thin linen cloth moistened in cold water between them so that they do not adhere again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a natural process like other wounds; however, when we perform this act intentionally, especially on infants, it is necessary for us to do our best and with the least harm possible.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not mention the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Because I have seen the majority of masters and surgeons who made circumcision around the glans, and on many, and on all a new foreskin; then the skin would heal because there are two membranes, and sometimes one above and one below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Now they cover it again, and the pain is doubled, and in the cleansing of the glans there is no assurance that the tip of the member is cleansed; and in the cleansing of the nail sometimes the iron slips and ruins the work, and many times they grow without needing to be cleansed, and I have seen this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the cleansing that is done around the glans, I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut justly both above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because when you press your hand, you cut evenly in I all the way; but let the thread be well wrapped around the skin; and let the manner of the first work be that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only tying the thread around the pole, and then let him pull it in every way he can; then let him stand between your hands straight up, and support his weight between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the pole and breathe on the heart, and draw it up as far as the heart is in; then cleanse it well from the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the place marked with a double thread, then tie it under I to the other string; and hold it by both hands by the second binding to the pouch and to the index finger, and pull between the two strings, then lift the heart gently and draw the head of the pole; then let the blood run little by little, for that is the wound; and put powder on top of the powder, a cloth glued with an egg cooked in rose water, confited with good fresh rosemary oil, and leave it until the next day, and heal it with another healing until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The shape of the forces for cleansing is such that the two heads are tense and sharp, and the heads are as large as the palm evenly:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	the error of the purification is when the vein within bleeds upon incision; therefore you should stretch it with your thumbnail so that the vein becomes an abscess; and then cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your thumbnail, hold it with tweezers and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it bleeds for three days and what is under the foreskin is swollen, then leave it until the abscesses are soothed and the skin is lightly scabs over; then cut it as much as you can move it, and be careful of the part of the foreskin, it will not harm it in any way.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Heal therefore the site of such a wound with powder, as we have said in the treatise on powders, and if it cuts too deeply into the foreskin and goes above it, it will not harm; then heal it, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	from retention of urine:
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to a stone, or frozen blood, or a tumor, or similar conditions which we have mentioned in the previous sections. If the urine is not released and you see that the obstruction is caused by a stone lodged in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be made to bend forward and rest his knees; his feet should be placed on his back, and he should press his abdomen from above the back, and strain as hard as he can. This will force the neck of the bladder upward and facilitate the passage of the stone, releasing the urine. If this does not work as described, and the patient feels great pain, then you must use an instrument called a "syringe", which is crafted as follows: it should be made of thin silver, as light as a bird's feather; the tube should be about a palm and a half in length, with a fine point.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the manner of the emission of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie to the end a little wool or cotton, and insert the end of the thread into the syringe; and squeeze out the excess wool and insert it into the syringe up to the top, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a chair, and raise the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water; then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the scrotum; then fill the syringe up to the bladder, and feel the patient urinate into the void, and if this is not done according to this order, it is because the person guiding where it goes is doing it wrong; then pull out the thread through all the wool, and the urine follows the wool, then withdraw it, and let the urine flow; and repeat the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scabs or blood comes in the bladder, or pus is gathered there, and you see it distilling with water and medicine, then do this to all the instrument which is called "clepsydra", and it is formed:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed and has three openings: two on one side and one on the other, as you can see; the hair-like channels through which the medicine works are such that it blocks the penis without addition, so that one can draw out moisture and insert it when necessary; and when you see your medicines moving in the bladder, place the tip of the catheter in the moisture and draw it up using the string attached to it; then the moisture will be drawn into the catheter, and the patient will feel it; this is the form of the subtle catheter used to catheterize the bladder: thus it is made:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is made of silver or brass, and the tip is higher up; and under it there is a testicle or an egg-sized lump; then take a lamb's bladder and put the medicine you want to use to catheterize the bladder in it, then tie it between the two testicles with a strong double thread, and heat this medicine over a fire; then insert the tip of the catheter into the penis, then press your hand on the bladder to draw the medicine up gently, until the patient feels that the medicine has reached the bladder; and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make it into a circle, and pierce a hole in it all around; then thread a strong string through these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a ball, and put in it what you want of oil and medicine and water, and attach it to the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the medicine reaches the bladder.
de la piere	of stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already said in the division of stones, and their extraction together with medicines; and I have told the difference between a stone lodged in the ureter, and all the signs, and in which kind of stone one should operate with cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder happens most often to children, and it is a sign that the water goes out of the bladder resembling water in its subtlety; and they open their eyes widely, and feel pain in their penis, and can urinate many times, and then become constipated; and many of these have hernia; and healing is easier for children until they are four years old, and it is much more painful in the elderly, and is middle-aged in those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema, to draw out all the feces which are in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it sometimes clogs up when seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet and lift him up and move him around so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it comes out from the top; then let him sit between your hands, which are prepared, and his hands should be under his thighs so that the bladder is completely tilted downward; then probe and touch inside; if you feel the stone in the urethra, then hasten now to cut upon the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not come out with the touch, then moisten your left index finger with oil, if the patient is fat, or your middle finger if the patient is slender and young; then insert it into his anus, and probe for the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, draw it up to the neck of the bladder; then press on your finger and draw it out where you intend to cut.Et s’il chiet au touchier dou tout, si le fai seoir droit et la quier a son fondement, et li quier li col de la vessie, et le bouton sus a sa main dreite, si que la vessie soit inclinans aval; puis tu l’esprouves s’il ne chiet au touc.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the assistant to press upon the bladder with his hand, and tell the patient to extend his testicles upward with his right hand, and with his left hand pull back the skin underneath the testicles in the area where the incision will be made; then insert the spatulum tightly, for this is its purpose:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And they do it between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the navel; and it should be straight on the stone, and your fingers should be at the anus, and the incision should be across the navel so that it is wide at the top and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large; by chance, the press on the finger which is in the anus may cause it to pop out without effort; and know that there is some stone which has angles and edges: then it is easy to remove; and there is some which is below, like a grape, and round, whose removal is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And so with the one which has angles and edges, make the incision larger; and if it does not pop out, then you must grip it with pincers which are as sharp as a file at the tip, to pull out the stone so that it does not escape; or you push underneath it a thin instrument curved at the end; and if you cannot grab it thus, then enlarge the opening, and if the blood bursts, then constrict it with vitriol; and if there is more than one stone, then insert the largest one first into the neck of the bladder, then pull it out, then the next largest, and so on if there are several.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then one must shave it, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things can happen to the patient: either they die or the urine comes out through the wound that the urethra cannot heal; but nevertheless, try to pull it out with tweezers, as much as you can pull it out in pieces; and when you have finished your work, anoint the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and constrict it, and put a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water on top to soothe the hot abscess; then resow the wound on his thigh, and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, wash the area well with oil and water, then treat the wound with thin ointment and thick ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if hot abscesses and corrosion of blood in the bladder occur, and it is retained by this means: push your finger into the wound, and draw out that blood, for if any remains, the bladder will be corroded and burst; then raise the wound with water and garlic and salt, and aid him in every way you know until he is healed; and it is necessary to tie his two thighs together with cords, assembling the remedies on the wound, every day you treat it.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small and it is in the urethra, and fixed there, and the urine cannot pass; then the treatment of what I have said before, that you should cut it many times, is sufficient for the cutting by this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proven this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take an iron needle according to this shape and let it have three angles bent into a tinder:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the penis under the stone, so that it cannot return to the bladder; then push the probe into the penis gently, until it reaches the stone; then turn the probe in your hand within the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side; then urine will come at once, then press your hand on what is left of the stone that is inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is broken at once and comes out with the urine, then the patient is cured; and if you cannot do this by any means that push against the stone, then tie a thread under the stone and another above it, then make an incision in the penis where the stone is between the two threads, then pull the stone out, and untie the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound; and treat it until it heals.
de la piere des femmes	of women's stones
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	Sometimes stones become lodged in women's bodies, and if this happens, the treatment is difficult due to three reasons: first, the woman might be a virgin; second, one cannot find an experienced woman who will examine her, especially if she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman well skilled in this art of midwifery; and the fourth way is that the woman's stone is more deeply embedded than a man's, so it needs to be cut more deeply, and there is great fear involved. And if necessity arises, one should take a midwife who is very experienced, and with difficulty persuade her, and if you cannot persuade her, then take a subtle mirror; and show her a wise woman experienced in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command in the examination of the stone; and be sure to look carefully to see if the woman is a virgin. Then she should push her finger into the vagina and feel for the stone; and if she finds it, she should press it beneath her finger, and recommend that she push her finger or the tip of her finger into the wound, and hold and press her left hand firmly over the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she is constipated, she should move her bowels little by little from the bladder to below, until she reaches the root of the thigh; then press on the stone at the root of the thigh towards the middle, where the ureter is located and feels the stone in that area; and do not move your finger above or below the stone, and start with a small incision; then insert the probe into the incision, feeling for the stone until it can be pushed out, and know that there are many types of stones: small and large, smooth and sharp, long and round, and those with bumps.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	then you will know their similarities to identify the problem.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood vessels bleed, put ground vitriol on the spot and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your task until the stone is out, and have the tools I told you about in the extraction of stones for men to help you with your work; and if the bleeding vessel is cut, put the powder on the site and apply pressure with bandages and bands, and do not re-open it, and leave the stone and do not pull it out, or the patient might die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the place healed, return to your work until the stone is out.
de hernie carnouse	of carnous hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Aquous effusion is nothing else but the collection of moisture or white pus, which is under the heart of the testicles, and contains the egg; and is called "pus", and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one believes that it is another egg; and it is the skin of the testicle between the white pus that we have mentioned; and this does not happen often.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the cause of this disease is due to weakness that comes from the testicles, and this matter is spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the testicles, and this moisture has many colors; it is either jaundice-like, or red, black, watery white, and so on; these are the signs to know this assembly, for if it is in the white syphilis that we have said, then the abscesses are reason, small as long as the figure of an egg, and does not open the testicles, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the fabric itself, then the abscesses are reason with part of an egg, and because of this they think it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white syphilis, then one feels it well; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, test all the ways in which the shape comes before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, then, what comes after the entrance, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, the patient should be bled according to their strength and the fullness of their body; then he lies on his back on something slightly raised, and many layers of cloth are placed underneath him; then he sits up on his left side, and the assistant sits on his right, and extends the arm to one of the two ribs of the heart; then take the spatulum and cut the skin of the ribs in between them from the top all the way down to the nipple, and the incision should be straight while cutting the skin of the ribs up to the white fat, and it is carefully peeled according to its strength; then pierce the fat with a large hole and draw out all the water, and then place your fingers on it, and hold the fat in place; and do not touch the heart, only the fat; cut it all the way around in sections, being careful to bleed profusely, or the water will return; and if the egg pops out during your work, put it back in its place when you have finished working on the fat; then bring the two edges of the skin of the ribs together with a single stitch, and then treat it like any other wound until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then you should ligate the vessels that are suspended, fearing the flow of blood; then cut the testicle all the way around at the suspension, and draw out the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if pus is gathered in two parts together, know that they are two blisters; then press the other part as you did the first equally, then wash out the blood, and put into the wound soft lamb's wool soaked in rose oil; and put on another piece of soft lamb's wool soaked in wine and oil, and place it over the two blisters, and put over that doubled linen, and tie it around to everything according to this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two pieces of linen and stuff them with lamb's wool according to this form and let them be sewn together at the crotch of the breeches, and let one of the heads press upon the bottom up to the back, and the other at the part of the buttock; and let the other two heads be over the two angles, and let all be tied together by the buckle of the breeches; and sometimes this blister is treated with cautery instead of iron. And it is that you press the chisel-like cautery gently upon the skin of the blisters, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white pus containing the water is uncovered; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce the pus sacs at the edges, and scorch them with this fine hot cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the cup in every way that you can, as long as you stretch everything out; and be careful not to let the fire touch the egg; and know that this work is the safest; and move while watching for blood loss, and changes in the wound; and if nothing makes you contrary, or abscesses or blood loss or anything else, then heal what makes you contrary, according to what has already been said.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this treatment due to its horror, then use perforation as I have told you, and it is that when you are certain by the signs we have mentioned that the pus-filled sac is drained, then have the patient sit on a high seat; then pierce the abscess in the part below throughout the entire spatumile, and place the perforation near the center of the body; make the holes large so all the fluid can flow out; then put cotton over the wound and bandage it, and let the remaining fluid drain, then heal the wound until it is clean; and if the white membrane does not allow the fluid to come out through the mouth of the wound, you should insert a feather or the instrument used to treat dropsy patients, whose shape is described earlier; widen the wound and know that the fluid will return, and will form again around six months later, and when it has formed as before, the patient will recover.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the apoplexy of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	You should know that in the treatment of this disease, fear leads to many complications, and that is why I think it is better to leave it untreated. But I will tell you about its treatment and the appearance of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Therefore, I say that many abscesses come from the body, especially from the groin; and there are many types of cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is what you should know: the cause can be an acute fever or a blow, and the color of the abscess depends on the color of the body; it does not hurt, and it is a serious abscess. Sometimes there are light-colored, fearful, and bloody abscesses, and sometimes they come from a ruptured artery or a swollen vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from a ruptured artery, it is recognized by the hot feeling of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and you should not touch it.Quant il vient par enfleure de voine, si est conus, s’il est d’un color que li cors soit, ou plus clers ou plus sombres; et si tu le demures, si viendra a teins, et ne sera pas grief; et s’il viengne de voine, il sera en la place de voine.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Those who have swelling in the vein are known by their appearance and the feeling of the fingers, and anyone can do well to shape it according to this appearance and others; you should press on the top of the testicles, then they will be raised up, and the white stringy part will be drawn out, and the suspensory ligament will be released from all parts of the testicle.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the testicle is already damaged by these diseases, then you should draw out and press on it; and if there is a hernia in the scrotum or in what is inside the vessels, then you should release all that membrane and press on it roundedly.Si li syfac et le trais sodez a la tenve, si covient que tu esprimes l’uef, et li trays en bas; et s’il est sodez a li corps, si covient que tu copes l’uef, et li trays en bas.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the egg is in a rear position, you must cup it all and extract the yolk, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is finished, apply the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the apoplexy of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is a hernia wrapped in a covering similar to a bulge, with the softening of the testicles, and the sick person moves painfully when he walks; and the cure of this disease is also just as fearful as the one above, and yet we will still tell you its treatment according to what the ancients did.Li ancien disent que tu covient faire l’incision de la tenve sus l’uef en bas, et delivre li syfac, et li coions en haut, et li trais, et li suspensoire; et si tu troves l’uef sodez a li corps, si covient que tu le copes et li trays en bas; et s’il est sodez a la tenve, si covient que tu le delivres de la tenve, et li trays en bas; et si tu troves li syfac dedens les coions, si covient que tu le delivre et li copes, et li trays en bas.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	Let the patient sit on an elevated seat, then tie the suspension band of the scrotum tightly with your fingers, around all the vessels near the penis, and constrict them firmly; then cut through the vessels with a sharp spatulum, widely and directly, so that they are exposed, and then scrape each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries in the temples; then insert a needle with a double thread where the vein first appeared, and tie it directly to the other end; then pull them gently according to the length of the body, following the corrupted moisture; then treat the wound as with the others, or with a bowstring, so that any vessel that is torn does not nourish one of the testicles; for this does no harm, and if the vein reaches all the vessels, then pull on the testicles at all the vessels, so that the urethra loses its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and dries up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rot of the sinus
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The causes of this hernia are from the incision that comes from the scrotum, or the extension on the abdomen in the region of the inguinal canal, causing the intestines to descend from this opening to one of the testicles; and this opening is in the scrotum, or from its extension, and these two types of hernias come from many causes: from percussion, or jumping, or straining, or lifting a heavy load, and similar activities; and the signs when it is from the extension of the scrotum are that it occurs little by little over a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are even all the way to the bottom, because the scrotum presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are that when it is from a section of syphilis, it brings on sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear in various places under the skin, and this is due to the output of the intestines and the body's defense against syphilis.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines descend with it, and is retained inside, causing great pain to the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cures of iron there is fear, from which one should flee.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the method of treatment is that you instruct the patient to draw the intestine with his hand into the wound if he can; then place your hands on his neck between your hands and lift his buttocks; then bend down the scrotum towards the navel, and grasp all the skin of the testicles from above; then insert hooks into the incision according to what you need in order to open the wound, and make it so that the ureter can come out; then scrape off the scrotum which is under the skin of the testicles, until the hard white scrotum is exposed everywhere; then put your index finger into the opening behind the testicle, between the white scrotum which is under the skin of the egg, and between the second scrotum, and separate what is behind the egg, and between the second scrotum; then move your right hand inside the scrotum, and lift up the white scrotum towards your left hand, and lift up the egg with all the scrotum towards the navel; then instruct an assistant to lift up the egg from above, and untie what is behind the bandage; then feel with your fingers if there is any intestine wrapped around the hard white scrotum, and if you find anything, put it back into the abdomen; then take a needle with a thick thread made of 10 threads, and insert it into the back part of the scrotum, which is after the skin of the testicles; then grasp the ends of the threads, so that there are 4 threads; then tie them together in the shape of a cross, and tie the scrotum with a strong band in two places; then wrap up the ends of the threads, and tie them firmly in two places, so that none of the vessels that nourish it can enter, causing an abscess to form there; then place the thread according to the first long one 2 fingers from that one, and after those two leave a space the size of a finger from the scrotum which is under the skin of the testicles; then grasp in the part which is under the skin of the testicles, so that the blood flows, as we have said before; then administer soft wool soaked in oil, and put it into the wounds, and apply the bandage which we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white syphilis that we have mentioned is cauterized after an incision, out of fear of a blood flow.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and leave the ligature in place until it cuts through; and if it takes time to fall out, use a hot water bath, and apply what we have said, until it cuts through; then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	of carnous hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this remedy, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients say that it is made like the thread that is joined to the vis, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after the incision above lightly from below; then cut them halfway through, and treat the abscess with what we have said, until the vessels fall out; then treat it as we have said, until it is completely healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes hernia occurs within the intestines, as we have said, and opens up the passageway; and no intestines fall out into the rectum, and if any do fall out it is a small amount, and they repair themselves every hour; and even if he remains in this condition for too long, he may develop an abscess in the intestines, as we have said, because the hernia is stretched and then becomes soft and swollen and opens up; and it is treated with cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is treated by iron in this way: and the patient lies on his back between your hands, then you cut the hernia open with a broad blade according to the amount of three fingers; and then extract the hernia sac which is under the skin, then take the intestinal thread and place it over the visible part of the hernia; and press it down firmly into the abdomen, then stitch up the two visible ends of the hernia sac using the intestinal thread, and stitch one side and then the other; then extract the intestinal thread, and do not cover or stretch the hernia sac or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of intestinal hernias; then treat it with wound treatment.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, clean and treat the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The syphilitic is constrained, and has no appearance in the rut; and the cautery is better in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the testicles becomes soft in some men because the contents within are softened, and it is milky in appearance. When one wishes to treat this, one must make the patient lie on his back, and cut the softened skin on top of the natural skin; then unite the two edges of the wound with a single stitch, or up to four stitches firmly; then cut between the stitches, and treat it as you would any other wound until it is healed, removing the stitches.
dou chastrement	of chastisement
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	You should know that castration is considered taboo in our law, and for this reason, I would prefer not to discuss it in this book. However, knowledge of castration is necessary for two reasons: first, so that the physician can answer questions about it and know how to perform the procedure; and second, because we often need to castrate certain animals to help us, such as bulls, rams, and horses.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say, therefore, that castration is done in two ways: either by pulling or by cutting.Car il y a deux manieres de castrer; l'une par atraction, et l'autre par fendure.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the method of castration by pulling, we make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles become soft and loose, then you grip them with your hand and pull until they come off.Et quant tu le veis faire, quere la beste tant qu’il soit remais; puis s’il est mort, quere li la teste et les piez, et mets la carne a cuire.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Of the castration of the groin: you should hold the beast, and squeeze the skin of the testicles in your left hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and hit each testicle once, when you have well scrotched them; and I leave some poc of the syrup and the subtle syrup which is over the vessels; and this manner of castration is worse than that which is done by attraction, because in attraction something of the testicles may remain by chance, by which the beast desires lust; then cure the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphroditism is of two types in men: one is that between the two testicles appears as the form of nature of a woman, where there is hair, and sometimes the urine flows out.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other type is in women, and has on the groin as a penis and testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment of men and women is that you dress the genitals adjusted all, and treat them as other wounds; in the second way, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of the testicles, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	of the testicles
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	A tent is an adjusted wound on the natural part, so that it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	You should dye the excess of the tentigen with your hand or fingernails, and cover it lightly; and do not go too deep, so that bleeding does not occur, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed; and for another wound that occurs at the mouth of the marris, use it, and perhaps it will jump out, and it is according to the appearance of a cow, and for this reason the ancients called it the "cow disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you need to treat it, as we have said before, treat it with a poultice, and heal it until it is cured.
de erratique	of Erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	It is errant if the nature of the woman is not understood, or the passage is small; and it is natural at birth, or accidental due to illness that comes to it; or it is caused by a foreign object, or a sore subtle or thick, and it is formed deep in the womb, or on the sides, or underneath, or wherever it may be; and they should understand conception and childbirth, and sometimes flowers as well; and knowledge of this comes from observing the dance.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swelling is visibly close by, then use your fingers or a stick.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a sore subtle and it is close to the lips, then do this: place your two index fingers together, and let the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then form the lips, so that the subtle sore is rolled, and cover the swelling; then take wool, moisten it in oil, and place it over the area; and let the woman lie at home every day, so that it may not stick.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	If the ulcer is hard and dense, then you must cut it with a spatulum similar to a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is from a recent blow, then it should be washed and cut; and have blood-stopping medicines such as aconite, dragon's blood, incense, and egg white; then apply a broad piece of wool so that the wound does not close up; and so for a long time, and then a linen bandage; then other treatments until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when there is bruising, it should be cut in this way, if it is not an abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For with an abscess in the shoulder, one must not cut.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins which bleed without custom, and when hemorrhoids are old they become ठठउला; and we have already said in the division their similarities to תालुल, and the signs, and I will say here those which receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and thrush, when they are fully developed in the anus, and do not respond to feeling, are not healed by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the mouth of the anus, which one can feel, are those that one can heal.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, you should put the woman in a cold room, then pull out the hemorrhoids with tweezers and cut off their roots, then powder them with medicines that constrict blood vessels, such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then tie her feet to the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if bleeding occurs, have her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel and gales and similar things, then take barley flour and mix it with honey and garlic, and make a poultice out of it to apply to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it is stopped, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, then make him breathe with cupping glasses on his back and breasts without bleeding them; then take wool, wet it in juice of plantain or of dogwood mixed with old wine, and apply it to the affected area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has drained, then treat the wound with ointment until it heals; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles rough ash, so cover it as I have said before; and then treat it until it heals.
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses in the anus
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscess come from the bowels, such as sores and suppurating abscesses, herpes, boils, and hemorrhoids, and hot abscesses, and several other diseases that I have mentioned in the introduction.Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary that I describe in this treatise the hot abscess that occurs in the buttocks, which is not one of the abscesses that collect in the bowel; and if you want to know how it is treated with iron, then observe whether the abscess is soft at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and whether it turns red when you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore do not hurry to pierce it, but let the pain subside; and then let the patient sit on a seat, and have two small seats on which he can lean, and support his back and press his feet against the sides of his legs; and let his buttocks be spread apart, and let him place his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a cord; then suck the orifice towards the right side, and administer the instrument used to open the abscess, from which the pus will flow out afterward; and it is necessary that when you see the instrument being administered, you insert the probe first to find out the depth of the abscess so that what goes into the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and so that it does not harm the patient; and if the instrument is larger, then cover the depth of the abscess with cloth so that the instrument does not cause him distress; and let him hold the cone of the instrument up, and let him apply the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscesses are opened and they are made to the soft hand, then they should be covered with the head, or the spathomile lead; and when the bowels are emptied, then you should put in the wound moist tents in rose oil, or in dry green oil; and put the tent out of the wound at the bottom of the injury, and put over the injury and over the clean linen pad moistened with water or malves are cooked; then cure after two days of ointment coming to this, until it is healed; and sometimes lift up the injury and the wound by enema of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lilies and aristolochia are cooked for a long time; then return to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is closed in the injury, then you should guard against cooking with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	It is necessary for the midwife to first know the natural form of childbirth, and the signs indicate when you see the woman pushing downward, and wanting to smell the aroma: then the child hurries to exit; thus you know that this childbirth is according to nature, and the placenta follows the baby, and the membranes come with it; and when you see these signs, one should gently press her belly so that the child emerges quickly; for when he exits from her womb, the placenta follows him, and the mother's superfluities are cleansed by good purification; and this one who comes out in a different way does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For sometimes the baby emerges feet first, or from the chest, hands, or stomach; it may emerge from the side, or in other bad positions; thus the midwife must be wise and cunning in these matters, and beware of errors and deception, and I will show you all the forms and how one should assist.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out through the head in a natural way, and the woman gives birth painfully, and her strength is weak, then let her sit on a low stool or have women hold her up; and let her drink a cup of rose water in which has been cooked oil or fenugreek, and then let the midwife put between her lips the small spatula of which I will now give the form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And split the membrane, and press against its nail until the moisture that is within flows out; and squeeze the belly of the woman so that the child descends, and if it does not descend, one should give the woman an enema with a poultice of fenugreek with castor oil; then make her sniff and sneeze with incense, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: then the child will come out.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the hands come out, you should gently pull them back in a little bit at a time; and if they cannot go in, put the woman on a stool, and lift her feet up; then tilt the stool so that she does not urinate while standing; and if the hands still cannot go in, and the child is dead, grab their hands with the knife placed as described earlier, and pull out the child, and reset everything as before.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the delivery of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes out on its feet, it should be pushed up; and then rock it gently back and forth until it is straightened out; then grab one of its feet and stretch it gently back and forth.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps up to the crotch, instruct it to grab hold, and make it sneeze from the neck; if it jumps out, so be it, if God wills.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump out as we have said, then draw it back little by little, until it is according to its natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it will be easy.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come out as we have described, take some mastic, and oil of six months old, and melted gum, and grind them all in a mortar; and spread this ointment on the woman's privates, then let her sit in warm water up to her ribcage; and when she is soft down there, put a collar of myrrh around her waist and tie it on tightly, and leave it for an hour; then have her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and squeeze her mouth and nose gently, and lightly press her belly, for the child will come out now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the child's birth onto his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this way, put your hands on its bottom gently; then lie it on its side, with its feet hanging down, and let it lie on its bed; and fold its hands gently, and then press its hands on its belly, and take away the cushions underneath, until it is laid flat; and if the child does not cry out, then take its feet and move them about, and then move its belly upwards, and then put your hands in; and rock the child gently; and command the woman to hold on until the child emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the birth of the child, which comes out, wide, one hand at a time
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I will tell you how to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, then make the woman stand up and walk; if she cannot walk, then make her sit on the bed, and raise her legs straight; then bring the mustard plaster that I have mentioned; and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a chair, and then try to bring back the hand; and rock the child according to its natural shape, and make her sneeze, and command her to hold on until the child emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the child's emergence onto his neck, and have spread his hands, and turned his face towards his mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I want the patient to hold their hand out, then slowly turn it, and flex it gently; and when it is even, put on a poultice of mustard and oil, as we have said, then instruct them to move it slowly; and when you have done this, have them sit on a chair, and instruct them to grab something; and make them sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same way with all the afterbirth
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it has come out in this way completely, then press on the afterbirth with your fingernail, until the moisture is expelled; and if the child can lean its face and neck forward, press on its chest so that it is not retained and the child dies; then put the child back inside, as you have placed it correctly, and instruct the woman to grab something a few times; then release her gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the twin's birth
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	You should know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens rarely.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	These are strange creatures, and they do not live long if not named; I know that they multiply and are separated by the syrup that divides them, which is tied to the womb; and sometimes they emerge as naturally as a tadpole, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they emerge quickly, the midwife should act as we have said, and be skilful, and do quickly and lightly what she does; and she should act thus as it benefits their health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the sea: one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and they are all shaped like children according to the measure of the glorious sage, and it is necessary for the midwife to know all this because by chance something similar might happen; so act according to what is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you cure a woman of a dead child or belly, as I have said in the division, and no force comes out, and you are compelled to work with your hands; then it is necessary that you know whether the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident where she fears death; then the woman must be supported on her back, and her shoulders inclined downward, and her legs raised; and the midwife applies the unguent to both parts, or lies her in bed so that she is not exposed to falling of the child; then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oils mixed with myrrh and fenugreek and linseed, then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and unguents; then insert them gently into the mother, then press the place where she inserts the fingers so that they may be suitable for this, and take care lest the child comes out onto its head; then insert the fingers into her mouth or throat or palace or under the beard or in the armpit or near the sides, and if the delivery is at the feet, insert them into the heel and the shins; and it is necessary that she holds the unguent in her right hand, and places the cloth between her fingers of the left hand, and inserts it gently all over her hand, and inserts the finger into one of these places that we have mentioned, until she reaches the empty space; and this is the form of the unguent:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	then insert it into the other hip, or in the third if you need to, so that the extractions are even; and then they should be even as they move from side to side to exit, and the hips should bite to hold them in place, just like this is the form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part remains, then anoint the bottom of one of his fingers with oil and insert it into that part, and pull out the other part; and if nothing remains, then put this hip or a higher one, and do this until he excretes everything forcefully.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot return due to the constriction, then you must wrap it with a cloth until it comes out completely; then pull on the joint of the wrist or the elbow, and you should do this for the other hand and feet as well.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the head of the child is large and it is tight in the passage, or if there is great pain gathered at the head, then you must push the spathula between your fingers, open up the head, and draw out the fluid; or pierce it with the instrument called "almidach", through which the shape comes with instruments or the chapter that follows this one; and in the same way proceed if the child has a naturally large head; then pull out the bones with tongs, and if the head pops out and is forced out of joint, split it so that the moisture that is in the lower passage flows out; and if it cannot emerge, cut it into pieces as much as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce it so that the moisture runs out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the swelling is on his feet, then the pulse is weak and the breath comes easily.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is stuck in the belly or the foot, then you should pull it out by the cloth wrapped around his hand; and make an incision in the belly or the foot, so that the moisture inside flows out; and if other members are stuck and the excrement remains, he should insert his hand into the depth of the wound and pull it out to the mouth of the wound; then he inserts a claw or two and pulls it out; and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has formed there, one should not work on it, but rather apply moist and fatty things; and the provider should apply poultices, and soak them in warm and softening water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the fetus is on his side, and you can bring it to a normal position, then administer what we have said for a living child; but if one cannot, then pull it out in pieces, and leave nothing of the afterbirth behind.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if the patient is affected by those abscesses that come in the sea, and blood oozing occurs, let it be immersed in water restricting movement, and give him other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose child had been dead in her womb; then another was sewn upon it and the other died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time she got an abscess on her breast, which swelled up so much that it broke open and began to discharge.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the priest, and I thought long, and could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong吸引plaster, and out came a bone, and then after a few days some more.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very merveilled, because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I treated the wound and put my hand in so that the woman was in a better state; and she walked around for a long time like this, and sometimes she would slightly bend forward from the waist; and I have only mentioned this chapter because when the master encounters a strange condition, he should know how to provide a remedy.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the dislocation back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Hereafter comes the form of the press, with which one is bound in books; and at two turns around two shoulders of the two lines.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Nevertheless, the horn should be more subtle than the constrictor, and it should be made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the instrument should be two fingers wide, and the edges of the wood should be half a palm long or a little more; and between the two pieces there should be two adjustments of this same wood, which are firmly attached at both ends, half a palm long or a little more; and these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the sea to open it when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, with its appearance more subtle and lighter, is made of ebony wood or boxwood, according to the appearance of tongs; and has at its two ends two adjustments, as you see, a palm-width long, and two fingers wide; and when you see open the wound to all the instrument, then let the woman lie on the bed, her feet hanging and her legs open, then insert the two adjustments adjusted together into the wound, and hold the head of the instrument between her thighs; then work your hand through the entire instrument, as you did with the tongs equally, according to the quantity that you see open the mouth of the wound, until the midwife does what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all decorated and have many variations in appearance; and when the surgeon has prepared them, his work is all the faster and more efficient for it, and it is also more impressive to his patients because of their variety.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despair about the instrument that you have not yet prepared, for its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold in her breath, and then make her sneeze with a scent, and hold your hands over her mouth and nose; and if she vomits because of it, all the better.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, he takes a pot and makes an opening in the lid, and puts in herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, such as wormwood, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in water over fire; then he puts one end of a pipe into the pot and the other end into the mouth of the wound, and applies heat until the vapors enter the wound; then he makes her sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	Then remove the pus gently.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if she remains after this treatment and is not cured, he should command the midwife to moisten her left hand with oil of sesame or with musk-scented ointment, and then insert it into the birth canal, and search for the placenta; and when she has found it, she should grasp it and gently stretch it, little by little, so that the wound does not tear during extraction; but she must move it slightly from side to side, and then pull; it will come out.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the wound is constricted, we have spoken of the cure for sneezing, and of the fumigation of herbs; and if it is not cured by all that we have said, then beware of fooling around with it; but you should bind what is at the mouth of the wound to the thigh of the woman, then cauterize it with a tetrafarmacon ointment; then she will defecate and recover, and the foul odor will exit; but nevertheless, when she defecates, there comes a bad odor in the stomach and head, and the patient feels ill.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore, you should use appropriate smoke: some of the ancients have tried smoke from watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one smokes out the woman for retained flowers and afterbirth is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	It is like glass in appearance, and the narrow end is put into nature, and the wide end is held over the fire; and the fumigation is applied to the charcoal, and the disease until it is cured, then another one is started.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born with an imperforate anus; their rectum is closed by a thin membrane. Therefore, the midwife should pierce this membrane with her finger, and not pierce it with a sharp instrument, and she must be careful not to touch the membrane with her fingernail; then she should apply soft lamb's wool soaked in wine and oil, and the wound will heal of itself.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will heal, then insert a peg of wooden splint and leave it for several days, and remove it when the child wants to go in the chamber pot.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this stopping of bleeding comes suddenly from a wound or an abscess; then it must be stopped suddenly: then it should be treated as we have said with the wooden splint.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula in ano
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come below the anus are nodules, and they grow larger when they originate from beneath the anus or in between its two parts, whether there is one fistula or several; and when this nodule becomes old, it opens up, and usually discharges a white or yellowish fluid, and sometimes they are suppurating; and they are caused by what comes out through either defecation or flatulence when the patient expels gas, and sometimes a worm comes out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that pierce all the way to the bladder, and halfway down the penis; and they reach the hip joint, and the scrotum.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows the fistula that flows in the anus and does not flow: and it is that you press your index finger or anus, and insert a thin needle of bronze or iron into the fistula when there is no twist.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has tortuosity, insert a thin tent or horsehair until you feel the tent or hair in your finger; and if you do not feel it, and no emission of pus nor wind comes out as we have said: know that it does not penetrate; so hurry to cure it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula has reached the bladder or the urethra, and the urine escapes, and cannot be stopped by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it has penetrated to the joint of the thigh, the tent will come out at the location; if there is no tortuosity and the source of the pain turns inward, then it will come out again, and neither medicine nor poultices by ointment will help; and in these flowing fistulas there is no cure except by hard work and the vanity of foolish physicians who interfere.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In that which is not persian and is not old, there is hope of health by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and you lift his legs up to his thighs, and have his thighs inclined towards his belly; then insert a tent made of copper or lead if there is any tortuosity, as far as you know where the tent goes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it around the anus, then you must insert your index finger, unless of course the tent has pierced through; and let it be exposed where you feel between your finger and the flesh, then you know that it is persian; do not work on it otherwise if it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One nevertheless can still heal some, but that happens rarely; and the aid one does, is that one burns the cautery sutilly according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before; and one inserts it all hot into the fistula, as far as it comes out by the anus; and do this twice or thrice, until you know that these burned flesh are like a feather of a bird; and then cure it with wet tents soaked in butter, until those burned flesh come off, and then cure it with ointment smearing flesh and binding.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus without pain, that is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it is thus without pain, that is good. If it does not otherwise heal; and if the tent pierces, and does not penetrate to the bone which is in the foundation, and there is between your finger and the tent a thick covering of flesh or of syphac, and you see the fistula near the covering of the heart; then cut off the beginning of the fistula, and pour in afterwards before the tent, and cauterize afterwards, until it reaches the chief of the tent; and the tent will be released, and fall out; then mend those flesh wounds that look like a bird's feather, and nothing will remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the pus comes out, and flows between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cautery gathers two things: namely, the burning of those flesh wounds, and the stanching of blood and the drying up of moisture; then the treatment of moist tents with butter or crushed substance, until the place where the fires burned in the bowels, and the wound heals over the arse; then treat the wound of the swelling veins with hard flesh, and they are dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes all the way to the fundament, and is distant from the body, put your finger into it, and probe it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and within it is the membrane or sac, or it is about to burst, there should be no fear but confidence and hope through one of three methods: either cauterize as we have said, or cut to the bottom, or if you can, insert a tent and cure as before; do not go too deep however, lest you cut into the structure supporting the bottom, and let the evacuation happen through that opening; then cure as we have said; it may be healed. Or remove that covering and clean after it is cut from below the sac, by tent or other pointed instrument; then cleanse the wounded tissue within the wound as much as possible; then try to restore the wound and dam the fistula in the affected area beyond the bottom: thus the patient will feel less discomfort.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes there are fistulas in this way; and when you put the tent into the fistula, it is on the side of the fundament near the skin above, then take a tent pierced at the top according to this shape:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And he inserts a twisted thread through it, and pushes the tent all along the thread into the fistula until it reaches its tip.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is bleeding inside the margin of the fundament, then pull out the thread from that hole so that you can put your finger into the fundament; and pull on the end of the thread and bring the two sides together and press them tight, and leave them for one or two days; and sometimes they need to be pressed until the threads cut through the flesh between them and the wound heals.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not drain, then have it drained in every way you can, if it is not too deeply embedded.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not appropriate to cover the wound with a bandage so tightly, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spatumile (a tool used to create a fistula) is sharp on one side and smooth on the other; so that it doesn't cut what it shouldn't, as you can see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two types: either they are inside the anus, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and some discharge blood, and there may be one or more, and they are outside the anus and at the top of the anus; but those that are outside have little moisture, and sometimes a little citrine water or a little blood, and they have the color of the body. The treatment for those who have them inside the anus is to instruct the patient to straining while defecating until the veins break and the threads appear; then you hurry and grab it with tweezers, or hold it with your nail, then cut it at its roots; and if the nails cannot hold it because of moisture, they take it with a piece of cloth, or cotton, or a piece of camel's hair; and pull it out with their fingers, then cut it, and dust some hot powder on top that is used for cauterization; or you cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterization, after treating other hemorrhoids until they are healed; and if the anus cannot come out, then the patient should be clistere with a sharp and harsh enema to clean what is inside the anus so that it can come out clearly. When the patient strains and the veins break through the anus, the treatment is easy; you grab them with your nail or tweezers, cut them, then treat them as we have said until they are healed and afraid of iron incision.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Take a twisted thread, and pierce it with a needle, then bring the thread to the top, and pierce the needle from the other side; turn both ends of the thread under the needle, and let it be loose; tighten the thread properly, then tie the thread, and take out the needle, and do likewise with all the others, and leave one to draw off the superfluity of blood; then place a moistened cloth in rose oil or cerate over the wound, and command the patient to rest; then let it be until it heals, and when it has healed, treat it with ointment and other remedies.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	of dryness of the anus or rectum
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is dryness of the bowels due to constipation from natural causes, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then you should cut the skin at the tip of a spatula or your nail, so that it does not get moist; then treat it until it is dry as it should be; and if it cannot dry, then restart the cutting more strongly than before, until it heals well and is peeled; then treat it until it is healed.
dou fremit	trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Ants are a small appearance of freckles before the body, and they go very deeply; and sometimes the frost bites them, and one feels them as if dead with trembling, and they come throughout the body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a candle made of goose fat, or a fat vulture feather, and place this candle on the trembling, so that the purple circle around the trembling; then return your hand to the entire candle so that you stroke all around the trembling, and push it deeply, and draw out the trembling by its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you can, make a cane of brass or iron according to this shape, and let it be thin beneath and broad above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you can, cauterize the vein, as it is described in the chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the shape of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes an enema is made of silver or brass, or of molten and hammered copper; and sometimes they are made from these small and large instruments, according to those who use them.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those that are used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the enema, whether small or large, is placed on top, or the belly is bound in this way:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And it has a bag of intestines that is tied, as you see, and the intestines are pierced inside; and it has two openings on one side, and one opening on the other; and the intestines where medicine is placed is made of a beast's bladder or parchment, and is pierced all around with small holes, and there is an inch of space between each hole, then insert strong threads through these holes in a twisted pattern, and assemble the bag so that it resembles a goat; and when the medicine is inside, attach it to the instrument with a strong thread, then catheterize; and this is the shape of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	Let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head with oil or egg white, or something similar, then insert it gently; then press the minister's hands together on the tube until it is all used up, then remove the tube, and let the patient lie with his legs against the wall, and if the medicine wants to come out, let him squint as much as he can; and if he sleeps for a night afterward, that is a great help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you catheterize him for diarrhea, and the medicine rushes to come out, then he should be given more until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are in the rectum or anus, the tube should be as thin as for a child; and this is the shape of the thin tube which presses against the skin:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already spoken of wound treatment in the section on surgery; now we will speak of treatments using hands and medicine, according to the situation.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and according to what makes them.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by stone, and cutting with sword and knife, or lance or staff or arrow, or similar objects; or they are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or head, or leg, or abdomen, or liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because their memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it is from a stone or similar object, and the skin is still broken and the wound is large, and you quickly doubt a hot abscess: then immediately make a tourniquet using the cephalic vein itself if there is little blood coming from the wound, and let the tourniquet be on the opposite side of the injured part; and keep the patient free from wine and rich foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to tourniquet, then reduce his food intake, and do not drink wine or eat meat; and put on the wound, if hot abscesses come out, cotton wet only in rose oil, or in stippressive wine; and if there is no hot abscess, then put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it has not been moved by the air, powder that I will describe a little later; and if the burn has been moved by the air, then put on some ointments until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like that from a sword, and the lips cannot be brought together with stitches, then bring them together with a ligature, as I will describe for abdominal wounds.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to the bone, and it can be seen, and only hangs on by a bit, then cut it; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as testicles and cooked wheat, also like fowl, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find rot in the skin, and it does not reach to the bone, then cut away the rotten flesh, and gouge it out, then cure it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which bleeds profusely, and cannot be staunched by medicine, then tie off the artery, and if that doesn't help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is easy; you should put this powder on so that it burns until the pain has subsided.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is thus: take one part incense; two parts dragon's blood; three parts quicklime, and powder it finely, and employ it upon the wound, and bind it firmly, until it heals well and joins to all its flesh; and then dress it well, and leave it without removing it, if it does not swell; for they do not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one should only cauterize with chalk, when they don't have incense or dragon's blood, but as long as the cautery moves the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the burn has moved the wound, let it be in the same state, and do not put any of this powder on it; but apply some digestive ointments, or barley flour made with water and honey, until it becomes soft; then cure it with other cures until it heals.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	If a bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, I will extract it with subtle pincers; and I will tell you about fractures of the head later.
de la plaie dou col	of a wound on the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound occurs on the neck and it is single, there is no difference between it and one on the head, but if the nerves of the neck or arteries are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is a nerve, do not apply any restraining cure, for it harms the nerves and makes them withdraw; and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member; but use moist medicines, such as hot water washed in cool water, and cooked honey mixed with rose oil, and also washed cooked stone, and other minerals according to this method, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, cut it and bind it, then treat it until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and it is chapped and full of pus, then pierce it or a lower place; and if the artery is cut, and bleeding ensues, then stop it, and cauterize it if necessary; and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the carotid, and the passage for food is blocked, causing the flesh to sink in, then cut the skin above the windpipe on the neck, and do not touch the windpipe but reset it according to its natural shape; and then bind it up gently, and leave it for several days, then treat it with poultices until it heals; and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then trepan it; and if there are pieces of bone, then draw them all out if you can, and those that you cannot reach, leave them until the wound heels over and the wound is cleaned and the passage unblocked; and if the wound is fresh, then use the powder I have described.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have described in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a lance or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a blow from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then examine whether the wound bleeds profusely: thus you will know that the wound is mortal; but if it is not deep, and the wound is fresh with all its blood, then do not put the powder in during the first hour, nor ligature it for the bleeding that may emerge from the depth, and return to the heart, and kill the patient; but apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day; and if you do not have an ointment, then place old cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture, and let the patient sleep with his head on the wound for three, four or more days; thus no spasms, nor evil tremors of the heart, nor strangulations of the intestines will come; and when you see good dispositions, then you know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure it with tenting and other remedies until it heals; and if it cannot heal, and there is still a wound, then you know there is a fistula; so treat it as it should be treated.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife, and it is simple, in the front or back, treat it as above; if it is large, stitch it; and if it is small, poweder it, and if it is deep in the bone, and has torn pieces, then clean the wound and draw out the foreign objects; and for other wounds in other parts of the body, judge as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	of rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	There are great, medium and small ruptures of the belly; from a large wound sometimes the intestine, or the nerves of the intestines, protrude, which causes the passage of air; and stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one, because one must stitch up the intestines little by little, warming them gradually as one does so; because the intestines swell as soon as they feel cold, and they are more difficult to stitch up. And know that there are four types of ruptures in the belly: the two common sutures occur in stitching the belly, and the sutures of other wounds in the body; and the other two own sutures are common to other wounds, although they are more appropriate with the belly, and I will describe each one and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and something of the intestine has come out, and there is something to be put back, it can be done in one of two ways: either due to the size of the wound as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen with cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in such a way: moisten a sponge or soft cloth in lukewarm water only, or cook in squinant water with cypress and spike, and warm the intestine until the swelling is gone; and sometimes this wine restringent is made, and it is used alone to reduce the swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling go down, moisten the intestine with water or altus and mallows that have been cooked, for this constricts the opening a little; and if it cannot be inserted, then make a small hole in the wound with an instrument used to treat hemorrhoids; and the first cure is better than cutting, which one should not do without great need; and the instrument for splitting it is: insert it into the fold and push it out, and see the form here:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines burst out, he should be sewn up again according to their natural form in its proper place, if you have the power, for this is best.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large and it is in the lower belly, you should make the patient lie on his back with his legs above his head; and if it is in the upper abdomen, he should be placed so that his head and feet are higher than his torso, and likewise if the rupture in the belly is to one side, then he should be positioned so that the wounded part is higher than the other; and thus you should arrange matters as I say for both large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds take what is appropriate for the task; then hold in your hand an instrument with which you push together the edges of the wound, and this is how you should sew: pierce both sides of the skin and the underlying muscle with a needle and strong thread tied to it; pull the needle through so that it comes out on the other side, leaving a loop of thread; then bring the two edges of the wound together and tie the ends of the thread in a knot; leave an interval between each stitch equal to half a finger; use needles that are not too small or thick, for the thin ones tear the flesh and the thick ones do not pierce it well; then tie off the loops of thread so that they do not hurt the patient when he sleeps, and put tents or bandages over the needles to hold them in place until the wound is healed; this method of sewing with needles is best for small wounds. The second kind of sewing is common, and it involves pushing together both sides of the skin and underlying muscle with a needle and strong thread tied to it; once you have passed the needle through all four layers, bring it back up where you started, as one would sew a garment, leaving an interval between each stitch equal to half a finger; this sewing method is suitable for large wounds. I sewed up a wound on a man's belly that had been cut with a knife; the wound was more than a palm in width and the intestines protruded two palms out of it; the wound was in the middle of his belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned his entrails after he had been dead for 24 hours, and the wound was sewn up for 15 days, and I healed him, and he recovered.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And they had judged him to be dead, and it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where there was no medicine to be found, nor any other remedies; and I placed old cotton on the wound twice daily, and washed it with honey water until he recovered.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you about two proper methods of sewing: take the needle, and pierce it from the outside through to the inside; when it has pierced the skin directly through, hold the thread where it emerges on the other side, and pierce it again from the inside out, so that the needle emerges on the other side. The understanding of this stitching is that you sew as a tailor sews pelts, and you leave the thread hanging on one side, then grab and pull it through to the other, until the seam is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of sewing, which Galen describes correctly, is like joining two pieces of cloth together naturally, and applying one end of the thread to the other, in such a way: insert a needle at the top of the wound near the edge, and pierce that spot only, leaving the two ends of the wound; then turn the needle and pierce from the outside in, to the inside, through the two ends of the wound; then pierce one and then the other from the outside in, through two other points on the skin near the edge of the wound; and this is the best and most common method of sewing.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen says this, and some testify to it: one should sew the belly with two needles, with thread in each; and one should push one needle in from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew up sores; and know that when the rut is in the middle of the belly, the sewing is more difficult than in other places on the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgments of the wound are like the judgments of other wounds: and it is that when you find the fresh wound full of blood, as long as the burn has not moved, then put back the intestines and the gut; then put on the powder-charcoal, and if the burn has not moved, put on any ointment available until the wound heals; then sew up the wound with silk thread, and solder the sutures, and the mirach; then cure the wound as with others, until it is healed; and if you have no medicine, put on old cotton, as soon as it starts to heal, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you don't need any other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound might cause gangrene in the principal limbs, then moisten a light blanket in warm tempered oil, or rose oil, and place it around the angles, and under the armpits; and if there is pain or swelling in the bowels, and it happens many times, then enema with warm black wine, and likewise if the swelling reaches the intestines; and perforate it from within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines, which are called 'young', cannot heal when they are raw, and this is due to the thinness of their walls, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and their proximity to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	If the skin around the wound tears, reset it as one would reset the intestines while it is still fresh; but if it has become green or black, tie up the area that is black so that no blood flow returns to it, for there are veins and arteries there; then cut away what is between the stitch, and hang the two edges of the wound above the wound itself until it eases to aid extraction when the sutures come out, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	of the road of boiling
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestines are ruptured and the wound is small, it can sometimes be cured in some people, for I saw a man who was stabbed in the belly with a lance; the wound was on the right side of his stomach, and it became inflamed and formed into an abscess, from which he passed both stool and wind; I applied treatment according to what I knew, and did not cease to apply poultices until it healed and the edges came together.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him sewing it up, I feared that the patient had a problem in his belly; and he had no harm but stayed in better condition, eating and drinking; and some experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in such a way: take a thread from a large testicle, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the thread has opened the mouth, put it on the two lips so that it holds his mouth shut; and then tie the head, and it will stay so that he cannot undo it; then put another thread after in the same way as before, until the wound is completely closed; and cauterize the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the wound is in the intestine and the patient suffers no harm, one can sew up the intestine with a fine thread cut from an animal's intestine, in this way: take the end of the intestinal thread which is well-charred, and then tie to it a fine linen thread twisted, then thread it through the needle and stitch the intestine, and draw it together; and this manner of stitching with threads offers no certainty except according to the way of hope and expectation; and if the wound is large and broad, especially when it is in one of the grails of the intestine, there is no healing except by subtle means.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it wakes up, is universally called a "fistula", and especially when it is swollen and becomes bowed inward.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And the fistula is according to its appearance, a hard, white nodule without pain, and it is bowed like the beak of a bird; sometimes it is clear and bowed, and sometimes thick; sometimes small, and sometimes large enough; I have already spoken about these in the division of wounds that any wound which is not healed and has no matter, is only due to one of nine causes: that is, because of the weakness of blood or body; or because of its evil nature; or because there is hard matter within it, and on the surface, which does not allow matter to emerge; or there is too much inflammation; or the location is damaged, and the matter is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good for treatment; or because the corruption has a pestilential nature; or because the digestion and recovery in that region are slow by nature, and it is swollen. And I have already shown all these causes and their signs, and the medical treatments in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now I will tell you about the treatment of a fistula that is done by hand.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins and arteries and nerves, from the face, or the bowels, or the bladder, or any of the sides, or the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; and also to any part that comes to the principal member, and in similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are in this way are very painful to heal, and there is only labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come to the places I have mentioned, and you have confidence in the cure, and you see it being understood, then take a tent of iron or steel, if the fistula is straight, so hold it; and if the fistula is crooked, then search with a slender tent of lead, for the lead bends easily around the crookedness; and if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot well probe it with tents, then cleanse it through one of the openings by enema, for moisture moves from one opening to another, and cleanses; then squeeze it hard as you can, so that you know whether there is bone or nerve, and feel how deep it goes, and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you press your hand, and where he feels it most; and when you truly know the location, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or vein, or in any of the places I have mentioned, then treat it as I have instructed, and remove the foulness and corrupted matter within; then cure it until it is healed, and if the fistula is very deep and straight, you should probe deeply as much as you can, then put moist tents in medical water, and insert them into the fistula up to its head, so that the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom; then apply healing ointments to soft flesh until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is damaged by the fistula, treat it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerve troubles the principal limbs, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then treat it with a king's touch until the corruption is completely removed, then cure it with things that warm it until it is healed; and if it is not healed, and returns to its previous state, know that you have not gone deep enough: uncover and probe until you reach the bottom, remove all the corruption, then restore the place; and if it is healed in this way, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach; then let nature take its course; and if there is a small corrupt bone, and you can pull it out with tweezers, then extract it with the appropriate instrument for this purpose, and if there are many bones, draw them all out, leaving none behind; and if moisture causes contrary effects, and there is no error or fear, then cut and dry and warm, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then place something on the wound to encourage pus to flow, and let it remain until the pus has gathered around the bone, and then the bones will come apart more easily; and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, then clean only the rottenness until all the blackness is removed, then close up the wound; and if there is a great deal of corruption, and it extends to the soft tissue of the bone, then it must be cleaned and packed all the way to the corruption, and then the wound treated until it is healed. And I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you can take example and help from this in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	He was a young man of about 30 years who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so that matter came to the leg and it became swollen with a large abscess, and there was no reason to open it; but the doctors, through their folly, worked on it until the abscess opened and much matter flowed out, and it became a fistula, and many openings appeared from which pus and fluid from the body flowed; and many doctors treated him for 2 years, and there was no one skilled in the art of medicine, so that I was called to see him, and I saw his leg and the remedies with which he was being treated, and what flowed from the openings into a great wound; and the skin of the young man became red and had a yellow color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I set up a tent at one of the openings, and then searched all the openings, and found that some came up against each other from different parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hurried, therefore, and probed one of the openings until I discovered a part of the bone, which I found to be corrupt and pierced, the corruption extending into the bone; I cut away what appeared to me to be of the corrupt bone, believing that there was no more corruption except what I removed; and then I began to dress the wound with strong remedies for a long time, but could not heal it; so I began again, and discovered the bone as before, finding the corruption still continued in the bone; I cut it away, and then removed it, and strove to heal the place; but I was unable to probe more than a palm's breadth of the bone, and had to abandon it for the time being, on account of the weakness of the patient who could not bear any longer, and also from fear of death, which I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For often because of the bloody evacuation he suffered, but was completely healed, and in the place of the bone a hard lump grew, and he had a good disposition and no harm or contrary effect at all, neither walking nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken anywhere in the body, it should be bound in this way: take a bandage and tighten it at the head of the open bone, and order someone to raise it upwards; and put another larger woolen bandage over the hard lump that is above the bone, and bind the head, so that you pull the corrupted flesh underneath, and uncover the flesh on top of the place where you see there should be binding, so that the bandage does not press on the flesh; and put a fire or a board under the bone to cover the corrupted flesh; and one should bind as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and bind again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If the bone is broken and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then expose the flesh all around; then put a fire under it, and then draw out the corruption from one side to the other, and make the incision close to the site of the corruption as we have said; and if the corruption is at the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and bind the bone on the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, there is no other way to treat it except to cut; and if the corruption is at the knuckle of the hand or the foot, this is a very serious matter, but nonetheless you must investigate the corrosion, how it presents itself to you; and cleanse it in every way that you can, but be careful not to harm the vein or nerve; and know that there are many ways to cut and bind these bones, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance, their thickness and thinness, their size and smallness, and their hardness. And therefore one must prepare a tool for each type of work; and know that the work will show you the tool that you will need, according to your knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of illnesses; and then choose the tool that you need according to what is appropriate.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The heads can be injured either internally or externally; and when you have treated this injury with remedies, and they are not effective, then cover the affected limb up to the point where the injury occurs, so that the patient escapes death, or the greater harm, by the defect in the limb; and the signs are that the limb becomes black, as if burned by fire, and after the blackness there is swelling, then this corruption spreads from limb to limb, and throughout the body; so act quickly in covering it up, and if the injury is caused by the sting of some venomous creature, such as a sea scorpion or adder or similar, and the injury is on the head, then cover it, and give no space for the venom to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if the injury reaches the hand, then cover it at the joint so that the corruption does not reach the arm; and if it reaches the arm, then cover it at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, that is death, and there is no remedy that can be applied beyond what its nature permits; and do likewise when the injury is on the foot: if it reaches the first joint, then cover after the other joint; and if it reaches the foot, then cover the whole foot; and if it ascends into the leg, then cover at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no remedy for this injury except to tie the limb from below and from above, and extend one instrument down the ligature, and another minister up the other ligature, and you separate the flesh that is between the two ligatures with a spatulum as wide as the wound, so that the bone is exposed; then cover it and place a linen cloth on each side, so that the ligature does not touch the healthy area, and this prevents further injury and abscesses.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if bleeding occurs when you operate, cauterize the area gently, or apply some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the injured member with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man in his sleep: he had a blackness that looked like a burn, and this corrosion began first on his toe of the foot, so that it affected the whole foot; and when the man saw the corrosion, he bandaged his foot, and was healed; and long afterwards the corrosion returned to his finger, and he came to me, and I applied repulsive substances after purification of the body, and he could not stop the corrosions; and he wanted me to cut off his hand, and I did not want to do it, for I had no hope that it would repel the matter; and I also feared that if I cut off his hand, he would die, for the man's vitality was weak; and he became desperate, returned to his home, and bandaged his hand, and was healed; and I have not heard of anyone else doing this, except for those who need it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	At times an abscess forms in a fleshy part, and remains so long that it causes a large gathering of pus; and then they burst and pierce, and the pus leaks out, leaving the place hollow like a vessel; and the skin above is as thin as a piece of cloth, and does not heal over to the bone or nerve, and such a disease is called 'sore', and not 'fistula'; but if it extends so far that it reaches the bone all around, then it is called a 'fistula'; and the skin is such that you can cover it all around, and especially when it is thin, like a piece of cloth; and it does not heal over.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you have confidence that the skin is healing and the corruption is not deep, and the flesh is thick, then treat it with a clyster thus: examine if the breast is swollen, and the pus that comes from it has a foul odor, then prepare an Egyptian medicine as follows: take equal parts of ash, oil, and litarge, and put it in a vessel over fire, until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey; then take some according to your need, and mix it with water and honey, and clysterize the breast, and compress the orifice; and leave the medicine inside for two hours, then express it out; do this many times, until the breast is clean and the pus is removed; and sometimes one is clysterized with ashes of vine wood, when this medicine is not available, and it is done thus: take vine wood ashes, and pour water over them, then strain it and clysterize with it, until you see that the breast is clean; and if the patient cannot bear it, or the Egyptian medicine, then use water and honey with a little litarge ground in it; or clysterize with honey and wine, so that the honey cleanses and washes, and the wine dries up the sore; and when you have done this, and are confident that the breast is clean, then clysterize it with something that produces flesh inside it, and take diaphoretic plaster, and mix it with rose oil and wine; or clysterize with other medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken in the section on ointments; and if the opening to the breast is small, and the tip of the clyster cannot enter, then enlarge it a little with a needle, and apply some Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment, until it is enlarged enough; and if the wound is too large, then cut it and leave only the place where the clyster can enter, and if the opening that drains the pus is above, then cover it higher up, or lower down according to where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Because when the bowels are in pain, you should not let any food in and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish, then arrange it so that the bowels move to the lowest place they can; and when the bowels are in pain, do not let any food in and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish, then arrange it so that the bowels move slightly downward, and leave nothing of the bowels behind; take consolidating medicines to put over the wound, and have them above the linen drape that covers the entire wound; then cover the most forceable spot on the breast, making the hole larger than before, then apply a soothing ointment on the other drape according to the size of the hole, and place it over the wound to lighten the bowels, and do not remove the large drape for several days at a time; and the one that is over the wound, remove often to remove the bowels, and know what comes from the bowels, whether it is venom or pus or enough, or digested or undigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and see if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in such a way and you see the nature that rises on the wound, then know that the breast has healed and is approaching health; and then loosen it in the morning, or midday, and when you loosen the wound, change the other drape and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast milk flows for many days, know that the breast will not dry up.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons run long, do not despair of health, for health is near.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	There are people whose wounds fester for a long time with putrid flesh, and those who have the opposite condition; and if indigestible food sits in the belly after many days, know that the belly is not healing; and if the belly takes a long time to heal and is swollen, then use drying medicines that are moist in substance but dry in nature, like diaphanous ointment, for it contains a great deal of vitriol, and it is the best medicine. Take diaphanous ointment, and make it with rose oil, and rose water equal in substance; then cook it and use it. And the same is done with thickened honey when diaphanous ointments are not available; take myrrh, aloes, and incense, and grind them into powder over the honey while it is on the fire; then glue a cloth to it, and place it on the belly, and sometimes one administers aristologus root, which is like flour made from beans and centaury; and use simples or compounds: grind them into powder and mix with the honey I mentioned, and use it. And if the cure is drawn out and not healed by this cure, then know that corruption has gone deep, and it makes impressions in the bone, or in the hard parts, or in the soft tissues; then use the fistula cure, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panaritis is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the finger or toe, or occasionally in other digits; and when it becomes inflamed, and no attention is paid to it, then it develops into a hard abscess, and it runs and seeps down to the root of the nail, and sometimes all the way to the bone; and corrosion sets in right down to the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the digit becomes swollen, and the colour turns purple.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have described in the section on treatment, and the treatment does not help, then you must cut away all the surplus nail that remains, and then cauterise the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cautery is a great help if the bone and nail are sound; and if the nail grows over the flesh, and begins to press on it, and the nail becomes ingrown, then you must place a thread beneath the nail so that the flesh can grow out from under the nail, and draw the thread up, and cut away the flesh carefully and gently, and apply burning and corrosive medicines to remove everything; then treat with ointments until it heals.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it out and pull it out, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal; and if you see the finger is corrupted, cut it at the first joint of the fingernail, as has been said before, then cure it until it is healed; and if it is frostbitten and swollen, and causes great pain, then you must heal it first; then cut the nail of the finger at an angle from the side, and be careful that the cutting does not reach the flesh underneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if this happens, place something over it to soothe the pain.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the deafness of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two types of fingernails that grow on the hands of some men by chance are all flesh, and by chance they have bones, and sometimes they have nails, and sometimes they grow at the base of the joint, or the growth is in some fingers of the hand.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those born in the webbing of the finger do not move, but those born at the joint of the finger may move; the size of one who is fleshy is thus: cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure; therefore, keep him covered.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For one who is born in the webbing of the finger, you must first cut the flesh around the bone to the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate thread, then treat it until it heals.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joint dislocations that come together come from birth, or from the dislocation of a wound, or from burns, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Then you must cut the suture, so that the fingers grow according to their natural shape; then put between two swabs or damp cloths in rose oil, so that they do not stick together; or you put between two pieces of thin plank, until the sewings are healed, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If this occurs in one of his hands with the palm, then treat that fracture as it should be treated.
des vils	of the vile
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Wens are large, enveloped, swollen veins full of melancholy humors that come in many parts of the body; and they occur more in legs of those who walk and work and carry things, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should administer to him a purgative drink made from woad, and then give him the basil-based remedy.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment with fire is according to two methods: one is that you cut it, and draw out the black blood; and the other method is that you raise the vein, and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The incision is done in this way: first, raise the leg with very hot water until the large veins are dilated, then stretch the leg from the thigh to just below the knee; then make an incision, one, two, or three inches long, in one place, and draw out the black blood with your hand from one end to the other, as much as the virtue of the medicine can bear; then ligature it, and command that he eat foods causing constipation while taking black bile; and repeat the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, and do not harm the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The treatment of the disease is as follows: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair on it, then put it in a bath and warm the leg with hot water until it turns red and the veins swell; and if you do not have a bath, heat it over a fire, and then press down on the vein near the knee or in the part below the ankle; then open the skin at the edge of the vein, and scrape the vein from both sides until it bleeds when touched; and when it is seen to be red and black, and when it sinks into the skin it looks like a white cord; then pierce the vein under the skin with a needle, and tie and draw it, and pierce another vein below, and repeat this three times; then scrape the skin over the vein until it bleeds, then release it at one end, and tie and draw it, and pierce another vein above, as before; then pierce another vein, or several if necessary, then release and pierce at the toe, then draw and release to the second piercing; then draw it out from vein to vein until it is completely extracted, then press on it; and if you cannot draw and raise it, pierce a needle through it with strong double thread, tie and draw it, and pierce under the vein, and turn your hand from side to side until it comes out; and be careful not to pierce it, for if it is pierced, it cannot be drawn or raised, and the patient will suffer harm; and when you have completely treated it, place moist wool soaked in wine and rose oil over the wound site, and dress it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vein is constricted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it twistsly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron with which one covers a vein is curved and does not cut so that it covers the vein; and it is of great curvature because if it were thin, it would cover the vein, but it should be thick as we have said, and here is the shape:
de la voinne civile	of a civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is bent in the legs, in hot parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in land where there is no moisture; and by chance it grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens from the pus that comes under the skin, just as snakes and worms come inside the body, bent between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a great inflammation comes in the leg, then the place changes color, and the vein begins to come out, as does the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the vein opens, you must wrap around it a piece of woolen cloth about two and a half inches to three inches in width, and tie it, leaving the cloth hanging on the leg, and every time something comes out from inside, wrap the remaining cloth around, and do not cover it at its root as long as it is all coming out; because if you cover it, it will return into the body, and will bring about an abscess and swelling in that place, for which reason this thing should be treated little by little up to the head, and nothing of it should remain in the body; and sometimes this vein is as long as five or ten palms, and a man came to me once whose was twenty palms long, and when you cover it, you must plug the hole with a straw, and pierce it to the bottom so that everything comes out, and empty out the matter inside which is causing the issue, and apply healing medicines in that place for a few days, then treat it as you would an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes this vein bleeds profusely, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and a lot of pus comes out, and from which it rains; therefore, treat it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that grow between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called "cow disease" in our land because it often affects cows, and it is caused by a small worm that grows between skin and flesh, traveling throughout the body, ascending and descending, until it breaks through the skin, and it can enter the eye and destroy it; this happens quite frequently.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being cured and treated, you cannot prevent it from emerging when it appears: therefore, you must tie the area above and below tightly with a strong string, then cut it out, and if the worm is deeply embedded in the flesh, cauterize it with fire until it dies; its greatest harm is that it can affect the eye as we have said, so if you see it approaching the eye, squeeze it firmly from underneath, then cut it out. The patient should also be cleansed with medicated lotions to remove putrid humors, and given purgative foods to reduce the proliferation of noxious humors.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of pain that comes from flatulence
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called "vomiting" in our language, and it is a pain that affects some members, and then moves from one member to another; and I saw what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling on the vein of the arm; and then soon after, I saw it rise up onto the shoulder like a worm, quickly, as quickly as silver when it moves from one place to another; the pain left that spot and settled in the shoulder, and then a little later spread throughout the body, until it reached the other arm; then she told me that it was circling around the body, just as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I wondered a lot how she moved from limb to limb like this, because I had never seen this disease in this way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Nevertheless, I have seen many people whose pain moved from one place to another, but I have not seen it as I did in the woman; and I thought that it was because women have dry bodies, and their veins are exposed, and this forced the flatulence to appear; and this is not apparent according to this reason in those who are delicate, and whose bodies are moist and their veins relaxed.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then bind it above and below tightly, and then press on it until that windiness is forced out of its place; and cauterize the spot; and if you do not see it yourself, then treat it with that which expels windiness, such as foul pills, and pills of serapin, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, depending on their appearance and depending on where in the body they land.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of their heads is that there are some with large points, and small, and barbed, and smooth; and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those with pieces; and those which pierce into any limb pierce in two ways: either into a principal limb, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, spleen, intestine, bladder, and similar limbs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it falls therefore in any part of the members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you hereafter, appears to you: then you must beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many dispositions; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not imbedded deeply, then pull it out, and cure the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain is when the arrow pierces the bone and penetrates the brain, and if there is bleeding from the wound which is on the brain, and if there is a fever and swelling and redness in themselves, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and disturbance of the mind, and vomiting of phlegm; and perhaps there is also discharge from the nose or ears; and perhaps they lose their speech and voice; and from the wound there is white moisture like pus, and it also oozes out like blood; and if this sign appears to you, then cease the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it has not entered deeply.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The signs of the seizure when it affects the heart are that it is on the left side of the chest, and feels as if it were stuck in a hard object, not moving; and sometimes the seizure causes muteness like the apoplexy, and black blood comes out, and there is chilliness and cold sweat, and syncope: then know without doubt that death is near.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the signs of the arrow that never leaves the lung are: spitting up foam without pain, and a swollen throat, and the patient changes color, and breathes hard and seeks the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow hits in the skin of the foot, it is among the small bones; and it causes great pain and great swelling and breathlessness; and all the limbs from the shoulders are affected.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow hits the stomach, perhaps something indigestible will come out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow pierces the gut and feces escape through the intestines, then there is no hope for a cure or for removing the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow pierces the bladder and urine escapes and flows out, and the patient feels great pain: know that this wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and armpit and spine of the back and hip and thigh and legs, and similar members, are safe according to several dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you to do, so that you can do the same.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	A certain person had a seizure and it struck the jaw at the root of the nose; I treated it by pressing on it and then releasing it under the fat of the ear, and he was healed without any numbness.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And on a child I treated a seizure that struck the fatty tissue under the eye below the eyelid, and the seizure was repelled, and only the tip could be touched towards the root of the nose; the seizure was as large as a Turkish arrowhead, all iron-colored without ears; the child was healed and no ill effects occurred.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And I extracted an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic, with ears: I cut the beards, and delicately extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I extracted an arrow from a man who had it lodged in his throat, and I thought he would die; and after thirty days had passed, his condition did not improve; so I cut into the arrow, and dislodged it, and pulled it out, and he suffered no ill effects.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a person with an arrow lodged in his back, and the wound is sewn up over it; and the arrow remains inside him, and his natural functions are unaffected, and he suffers no harm in any of his natural processes.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And I saw another man who had an arrow lodged in his face, and the wound was sewn up; and it remained there without causing him great pain; and many other similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And I treated an arrow wound in the head of a prince who had a arrow stuck in his eye, and it was slightly inclined to the right; and the arrow was all swollen. I was called to attend him after three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I probed it with a thin instrument, and did not feel anything; but he felt pain and pressure below his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I applied a digestive and astringent poultice to the site, so that the swelling would go down; and I could see the head of the arrow.Et la dis je qu’il fust sainz, si li leus de la saiette estoit hors del leu, et si ne i demourast mie pointure ne dolor; car li leus enflast et s’alarga a tous costez.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the ointment many times, and healed the wound directly, and the patient remained in this state for a long time, until he felt the arrow inside his nose; and he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied corrosive medicine to the wound many times, until it was opened, and I probed it, and felt the head of the arrow which was lodged in the wound; then I adjusted the opening of the wound with the medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly; and the patient recovered well within four months, and then the wound healed so that I could not extract the arrow; therefore I did not cease to use instruments and tricks, until one day I took the arrow with some good tweezers, according to the form which will be described at the end of this chapter, and I pulled it out and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored; I restored it therefore, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or I will tell you of the extraction of certain arrows, so that you may apply my treatment to anything else which I do not mention, for books cannot encompass everything; but wise masters often discover something new from little things, and from what is present and defective, they find a new cure, and a new instrument, in the case of strange diseases which occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows enter the body in two ways, either through the place where they strike, or through another part; and those which go straight in through the spot where they strike are called arrow-wounds through flesh, and these sometimes heal up now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not come out now, let it be left until the swelling around the wound has gone down and the opening has healed; and if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it for a few days, moving it every day; and then it will come out, and if it does not, pierce all around with a very thin needle until the opening is enlarged, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the skull, and goes right through to one of the ventricles of the brain, and any of the aforementioned symptoms appear: do not remove it, but leave it until it is even after a few days, for if the arrow reaches the brain, that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not stuck in the brain, and does not reach the brain, and the patient survives for a few days without any bad symptoms, then use this method to remove it:
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very deep and cannot be extracted, then treat around it as I have told you; then heal the area until it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is lodged in the body where it cannot be seen, then seek it throughout the entire body; and if you feel it, then draw it out with a suitable instrument; and if due to the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then cut around the wound as much as necessary for the wound to be large enough; and draw out the arrow if you can, and if there are ears by which it is attached, remove the flesh that is pierced on both sides as far as you can, and then break or fold over the ears of the arrow so that you can pull it out; and be careful not to break the arrow as you pull it out.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot at once, then leave it until around the area it entered is swollen, then milk it, for extraction is easier then.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the bleeding causes a contrary effect, then administer what we have said about the treatment in its chapter; and beware of cutting into nerves and opening veins, and use any means you can to gently pull out the arrow without danger, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and put the patient in the position he was in when the arrow hit him, for that is the greatest help, and if you cannot, then position him according to what the symptoms show.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another part, or where something appears from it, or the skin is swollen in such a place that one sees or feels it apparently: cut above it, as far as the pincers can grasp, and then pull it out; thus jump out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is stuck in the bone, then rotate your hand rapidly so that it goes into the bone and widens the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	If it cannot come out, then leave it for now and try to extract it again until it comes out; if there is a fragment of the arrow, then insert the instrument all the way in; and if the shaft is broken and you see that you can apply pressure, then press the instrument into the broken shaft so that the point of the arrow goes into the instrument's hole; then pull it out, and if the arrow is stuck in the instrument, then pull the instrument in with the point going in, to make the extraction easier.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is poisonous, then you must cut off all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, and then treat the wound as it should be.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow pierces the leg or foot or belly or bladder or ribs, and it is close by, and you can cover it up if it is struck; and be careful not to cover the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then dress the wound, if necessary; and cure it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tongs used to treat arrows is similar to a bird's beak, and here is its shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many types: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the feathered end [of the arrow] is also like the feathers on an bird, to push against the tip of the arrow, just as it is shaped:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the form of tongs for prying and probing is thus:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of common veins in the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are thirty-one veins from which one can bleed, and there are sixteen in the head, namely: two batons located behind the ears, called 'ear-beaks'; and two arteries in the temples that are visible; and two veins in the corners of the eyes, called 'aspires'; and the vein in the middle of the forehead; and the vein at the top of the nose; and two windpipes located in the neck; and two veins above the lips, these are the veins called 'augerich'; and two veins under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins from which we commonly bleed are five in each arm: one is the cephalic, which is on the left side of the chest, and the common people call it 'vein of the head'; and the middle one is called 'fast', and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and the common people call it 'vein of the heart'; and the basilic is on the right side of the chest, and the common people call it 'vein of the belly', and it is above the hipbone, and it is that one from which we bleed, which opens clearly above the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the salvatelle is the vein which is between the auricular and annular, and it has two branches; and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is below the curve of the pouch on the left side of the chest, and the second is sophene, which is at the ankle on the right side of the chest; and the vein called 'nesse', which is at the ankle on the other side.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The bleeding of veins that are behind the ears is helped by old catarrh remedies and by emigrant; and the qualities of the bloodletting instrument, as I told you, and it is that you move the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then squeeze the patient's neck with a cloth until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending on the head: then press them with your finger, and where you feel the pulse under your finger, sign it with ink; then take the lance, and pierce it under the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand to the entire vein upstream, and pierce through the skin and the vein well with two strokes of the knife, and make the blood come out until you see it; then stop and ligate it, until it is healed; and I have already said about incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The bleeding of the two arteries that are in the two temples, is good for old migraines, and for a headache, and for habitual ophthalmia, and for the body of tears ague to the eyes; and the qualities of the bleeding are as I said: and it is that the patient stretches his neck, so that the two veins appear clearly; and feel the pulse under your thumb, and then sign with your finger; then lift the vein above your thumb, and insert the lance below, and lift the vein above, and cup it, as you have done in the other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need; then release the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put on cotton; and then bind it firmly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of their binding and their extraction, at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The bleeding of the vein in the forehead is as good as the bleeding of the cephalic vein for old diseases of the face, and for emigration and redness; and the qualities are such that the patient turns his neck in twisting until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "digging", whose form is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point on the vein, and press with your hand or something else, and let the blood issue according to the amount you see; then release the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healed, and sometimes the work can be done with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Nevertheless, the flames should not be too sharp; and the wound is oblique, for the bone is close by, and perhaps the flame will break when it is very thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The bleeding of the two veins that are in the temples helps with itches, and with tics, and with redness, and with eye orbs, and with facial diseases; and the qualities of their bleeding are such that the patient turns his neck in twisting, as before; then bleed them, and the bleeding should be through a small hole, with a wide flame, because there is no flesh there.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the veins are subtle, perhaps they will break; then draw blood, as much as you need, and then ligature it with a thread, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The bleeding of the vein of the nose is useful for ague, and for sudden madness, and for facial diseases such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, especially when it is chronic. The nature of this bleeding is that the patient holds his head, then squeezes his nostrils with his left hand, and takes a long, thin flame, and inserts it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well otherwise, and the blood will begin to flow now; do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then ligate it overnight, for it is quickly restored. And this is the shape of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The bleeding of the two sinuses helps with the constriction of the eyes, and with many diseases, and with itching, and with scabs, and with herpes, and with ulcers; and the nature of this bleeding is as we have said: the patient should hold his head down, and the doctor standing above him, then bleed the vein of the long one quite widely, then draw the blood temperately, or as much as is needed; then do the same in the other vein, then untie the ligature, and gently constrict both veins so that the patient does not choke; and leave it until the morning, so that the wound heals.
de la sainie des leivres	on bleeding from the gums
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The bleeding of veins in the lips above helps with sores in the mouth, and腐敗of gums, and splitting of lips, and pain in the teeth and gums.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of bleeding is to have the patient sit before you and hold his neck as I have said; then turn the lip and look at two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, which can be recognized because they are black and because there are tiny black veins around them: compress both of them, and if you cannot distinguish them and you doubt their location, then compress the largest one on each side, and also do the same for the two veins above and below, because it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	on bleeding under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The bleeding of veins that are beneath the tongue is helped by the bleeding of the cephalic vein, and it is by the constriction of the throat, and by diseases of the uvula, and by diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the bleeding should be such that the patient holds the hand in front of the sun, and touches the tongue, and looks underneath each side to see a black vein: therefore heal one and then the other, and do not go too deep, for beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the neck from which one usually bleeds are bled in two ways: either with a wide silver pin, or an olive-wood point as thin as a toothpick, and is called "anesil"; and they are wide and thin according to the width and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the olive wood point is very renowned, and it is wide as you can see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the smooth veins of the neck that contain thick and turbid blood, and that is the shape of the olive-wood point.And for opening the veins in the face, one must open those that are plain and contain thick blood; and it is a matter of skill to know which ones these are:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more pointed and subtle, used for bleeding the subtle veins where there is subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The sanctuary of St. Basil, which is one of these veins, helps ailments that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the abdomen; and it is necessary for the surgeon to bleeding it, and to cauterize the artery that is underneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it hits the artery, and bleeding occurs, then it must be staunched as I have said; but the flame should not be clamped, but cut like a thread.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if St. Basil's vein does not open clearly, then you should move it and change to another; or you can cut a branch from it, or open the vein in the arm instead of it: it will open clearly; and then cauterize it with the flame, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you want to know the location of the opening, then you should stretch out the arm, and feel the pulse until you recognize it; then mark the spot on the inside, and then bind the arm, and cauterize the vein with the flame, as we have said; and be careful not to pierce the artery when you see the spot swollen, for that is the artery: avoid it therefore.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it flow upwards like a child's urine, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is arterial blood: therefore hasten and place your finger over it for a long time, then remove your finger if the flow stops, as often happens; tie up the arm and leave it thus, and do not move it until it has healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the bleeding is not staunched and it flows, and medicine is not present, then seize the artery and open it, for that is where the blood retreats; and staunch the flow.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Take a piece of a fig tree, cut it in half, and take one half and tie it on firmly until the next day; if the flow of blood stops, that is good; if not, then stop it with one of the powders which stops bleeding, as we have said; but stopping the flow of blood is not easy in many cases because of the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The wound in the middle if it is bleeding from both above and below, because it is composed of basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said; and the surgeon must be careful of the nerve underneath, and not cut too deeply, and find the nerve, which may be swollen and the nerve affected, and perhaps unable to heal; and this nerve often opens, and if it does not open in some men because of its subtlety, then you should treat it with an anaesthetic instrument; and guard the nerve as best you can.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, they cut it deeply.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The healing of the cephalic vein helps to draw blood from the head and aids the eyes; it should be healed by cauterizing with an olive-oil flame or a myrtle-oil flame, for this is the safest of all veins to cauterize as there are no nerves or arteries beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Nevertheless, one should seek the easiest place, and if it fails the first time, try again; and sometimes the site swells in some men when it fails the first time, but it does not cause any harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the bleeding is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you should know about healing is that it is only done to maintain health and prevent future illnesses; healing should be performed through one of the three veins: the cephalic, the fast, or the basilic; healing should be performed on the first day, or the third after two or three hours of the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The bleeding that is administered for illnesses does not have a determined time, but when there is a need during the day or night, at all times and in all seasons; and one should not bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman who is pregnant beyond the fourth month until the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should the very old who have passed 60 years be bled.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when one wishes to bleed, in any manner, it is necessary to cleanse the intestines with a gentle clyster if he has much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw harmful excess fluids from the intestines towards the principal limbs; nor should one bleed those who are bloated from too much meat and wine, or those who are drunk, as long as they are so, nor those who are hydroptic. And one should not bleed after a colic attack, vomiting, diarrhea, and excessive sexual intercourse with a woman, and from exertion, watching, fasting, and what depletes the body, either through an instrument or from the body; then subtly alter the humors, if the pulse is strong, through food, drink, and medicine, if you have the skill. Then enter the bath, if nothing hinders it, to subtly alter the blood, and bleed from the vein on the arm towards the elbow, as we have said, and be careful that day to avoid exertion, pricking, and lust, and similar things; and be calm and cheerful, and let the person bleeding be higher than the one being bled, and rub the arm two or three times, then tighten the ligature above the vein moderately, for if it is too tight or too loose, it will not affect the blood. Then wet the blade of the bleeding knife with a little old oil, then place his left index finger on that vein below where he wants to bleed, so that the vein does not shrink and fail under the knife.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	Because there are veins that flow like cords to the armpit, and some that are filled with wind, so that when one applies flame, it retreats from the flame, and cannot open the vein; and so one must be careful of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens the first time, that is good; if not, he should try again a little lower on the same spot or above it, if the area is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the area is swollen and the patient is afraid, leave it for one or two days without binding the arm: perhaps a hot abscess will develop. Do not enter the bath, then restart the bleeding if she wishes; and if the opening is small, cut the skin around it subtly, and you doubt that it won’t release as much blood as you want, then apply the flame directly to that opening; and work it gently, so that the area is swollen; for this happens many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the spot is swollen, do not re-bandage the wound, but put a little liniment of oil there, for it lightens the body of blood, and in that place the liniment of oil is rendered; and thus administer the liniment of oil in every wound that you bandage veins to stop the flow of blood; and this also makes a blister and draws fluid out when applied to the spot; it disperses the blood when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if a large abscess comes, which often happens, especially when it has not been bandaged before except for the small opening of the vein, then hurry and put a sponge soaked in warm water on the spot, and press for an hour; and you must do this after the flow of blood from the wound, and if there is any darkness or greenness remaining on the spot afterwards, it does not hurt; and if you see it, put something of aloe or myrrh reduced to juice, ointment, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there is an abscess and appearance of pus at the site of the basilic vein; put your hand over it, and if you feel the area soft to the pressure of your hand, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore be sure not to place anything on the wound that we have described, for it might enter an artery; instead, apply a dry ointment to harden the area, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw blood from each according to its quantity of virtue and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if it appears thick, let it flow until it becomes thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for one who is full and outward, and needs bloodletting, that the wound be made larger, and the flames should be wide; and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and one must bleed little and often, and one should bleed by cutting across, not by pricking; and this method of bleeding is safe from blood loss and nerve damage, and is better than bleeding from a long or wide cut.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for one whose body needs bleeding, one should give moist bread in pomegranate juice; if they are feverish, then three or four times before the bleeding. And if of a cold complexion, one should eat moist bread in rosewater syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and cardamom, and perfumed syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	If he faints at the bleeding, after a large loss of blood, then he should drink a brothy soup and a subtle fragrant syrup, and use other things that we have discussed in the chapter on syncope, for the opening of the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to open his arm and bleed again, when he is weakened by heavy bleeding, he should bleed a little at a time according to the amount of his continued strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wants to open their arm after the first bleeding, and they have a strong pulse, they should bleed at .7 hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wishes to bleed elsewhere, one must bleed on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is a great deal of blood in the body that has been heated and causes fever; therefore, you must draw out a large quantity, and widen the opening so that it drains out freely; then you should examine all the conditions of bleeding, and place your hand over his pulse as he bleeds, so that death does not come to the spot of the vein, which often happens when the surgeon is negligent; nor, when you see the arm loosening and the blood flowing a second time and the opening is closed, should you press firmly on it; nor, if it is bent, should you suddenly extend the arm, for that would be harmful; but let it be until he bleeds a second time; or you may touch it with the tip of the flame, so that the congealed blood in the vein melts and flows out, and then apply some warm water, and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, leave it and do not constrict it until the abscess is relieved.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, do so in the same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The veins in the arm are healthy in terms of the vein in the head because it is composed of them.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of bleeding is that the patient puts his hand in warm water until the vein turns red; then let it be bound lightly, so that the vein appears well, then bleed now through the middle, not the wide nor the long; and let the slit be wide, and let it be bled well near the joint of the hand, and if no blood comes out, put the hand in warm water again, and let the blood run into the water until you have enough; and if it is winter, do not turn the hand back into warm water, because one puts it there more in winter than in summer; and the bleeding of this vein is safer than all other veins, because there is no artery or nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	Bleeding the salvatele vein of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver; and here is the manner: stretch out the hand, and put it in warm water until the vein swells, as one sees; and if one bleeds it through the middle, and if you cut it all the way across, then it does no harm; and do not go too deep, for the nerves are completely stripped of flesh underneath, and then put the hand back in warm water if the blood congeals in the wound and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, put oil and silk on the vein to seal it quickly, and do the same for each vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The bleeding in the left hand is beneficial for the disease of the mouse, and do everything just as I told you about the right one.Et s’il aduenist que la main destre ou senestre sainie, et ne voit nule sang ne nule sainie, si met sus li piere et sus li membres oile de fong, si qu’ele se puet mouevra et eslonger; car ele est congelee.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The remedy for the disease of the sophene is good for all diseases that are under the body, such as diseases of the testes, and retention of fluid, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of its remedy are that the patient puts his foot in hot water, and rubs the vein until it pops, and ties something above the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, and up the foot there go many veins; therefore heal it at the widest vein, or at the ankle, whichever is better.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal it on the foot, then beware of the nerves that are underneath, and heal it across, as well as by copping; and let the flames be extinguished.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water, and let the vein bleed well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the healer fails the first time, he should try again the second time higher up, because the site is salty; do not worry about nerves, as we have said, and thus do with the sophene of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The site of the sciatic vein is at the ankle, and its treatment extends to the pain in the hip, when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the nature of his wound is such that the patient enters the bath, and twists his ankle three times, for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then heal it in every way you can, and by crossing over; and it is better that you cover it, for the spot is safe, and it is very relaxed in many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not believe this, then heal a vein that opens on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves; and make it flow with blood as much as you can see, and then loosen the bandage, and place cotton on it and compress it; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of cupping wounds
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Leaches are made from horns, or iron, or glass; and bleeding is done in two ways: either by cutting and drawing blood, or without cutting.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping which is done by burning is done in two ways: with fire, or without; and the cupping that is done by burning and bloodletting is done in 14 places on the body, of which one is at the very top of the head; and the other is in the neck; and two others are on either side of the neck; and the cupping is under the chin; and the cupping is on the shoulders; and the cupping is on the hips; and the cupping is on the arms; and the cupping is on the legs; and the cupping is on the ankles; and the cupping does not draw blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and because of this it does not weaken them at all, just as one does with vein-opening treatment; and it must not be administered with fire or without, in any disease that comes from fullness, until the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if, from necessity or habit, one must bleed, then we should do so at the beginning or end of the month, and at all times in between; for there are some who, when they need to bleed, feel heavy-headed; and some who experience congestion and redness on their face, head, and neck, and darkness before their eyes; and some who experience a flow of blood in their mouth, and swelling of the tongue, and bleeding gums; and there are those who faint, and see dark visions of pain, death, and other things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially if it is during the month, we command them to fast for three hours during the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The bleeding of the nose helps with headaches that originate in the eyes, and should not be done after the evacuation of the entire body; and this venting is in lieu of the bleeding of the cephalic vein, and should not be used by those of a cold complexion, or who have catarrh, as it does them great harm; and for these reasons, the elderly should not use it, nor those with cold diseases of the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who are often healed by this, become oblate, and for this reason the leech should place the ventouse a little lower because of the risk of oblateness.Et si est en leu de la sainie del coeur, et que li home soit de chaude complexion, il est bon;
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation in the neck is located at the junction of the neck and the base of the skull, and this helps to relieve pressure on the feet, and to split the channel of the lung, and for belching and vomiting; and it should not be pushed too hard, as if held too tightly, it will cause discomfort or stomach and heart pain.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The second pair of ventilation holes in the neck help with headaches, and eye pain and inflammation, and with strangulation, and toothache, and are located at the junction of the skull; and you must instruct the surgeon to express his hand when placing it, so that he does not press the artery, and cause a gushing of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	Ventilation under the chin is good for diseases of the mouth and gums and similar diseases in the mouth; it is in the area of the veins on both lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Ventilation of the armpits is good for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The ventilation holes in the armpits are like three veins in the arm, as they draw blood from these large vessels; and command the surgeon not to push too deeply, as the area is bare of flesh, and beneath it lie nerves and arteries.Li ventosations des coutes est en leu de la sainie dou pis, et atrait sanc de li gros veine qui alent a li bras, et de la veine qui alent a la main; et si li dolors sont en la main, si covient que tu mettes tuit li poing sur le coud, et tu ventoses li cus del coud.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping glass that is placed on the back is good for hemorrhoids and illnesses below, and the cupping glass should be large and made of brass, because it needs to suck well; and sometimes if it breaks, it makes large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	Cupping glasses on the legs heal very well, because they draw blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains in the joints, and for pain in the hip, and the bladder, and they relieve swelling; and they are placed at the .ij. sophenes, and at the .ij. ankles, and yet they weaken the body after a long time, and bring fainting in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the cupping glass is that you put it on first empty, and suck gently, and place it firmly, and move evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the skin reddened and swollen, and the blood appears; then let go, and reapply the cupping glasses, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are those who have such thick skin and clear pores: you should pierce only once, and make wide wounds, and a little deep; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, you should pierce twice: the first time to open up the pathway for the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very thick, you should pierce a third time; and when we want to draw a little blood, we only piercing once.Et se li sans est clers et legiers, si convient soulement ferir une fois, et traire legierement, et ne trop ne trop poc.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want a lot of blood, we bleed often; and if the blood is thick, we pierce it with a needle, and the ends [of the needles] should be heated so that the veins are pierced suddenly, and it suits those who have thick and tough skin and narrow pores that you grease the ends of the cupping glasses with aperitif and dissolutive oil: if it is in winter, with violet oil, or almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if it is in summer, with watercress oil, or lily, or chamomile, or similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is gross and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsam, or oil of anise, and similar.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the person has soft skin and wide pores, no oil should be used on them, but they should be washed after cupping with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or pumpkin water, or porcelain water, or similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have a lot of moisture, if they rise from ash, or myrrh water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large swellings should get up from old wine, or from dry water, or from a decoction of fennel or chamomile, or similar; and one should not bleed with a cupping glass before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and one should not sleep after venesection, and it is necessary that he be warm when he is to be bled and when he has been bled.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And be wary if the patient is choleric, and if the blood is too thin and inflamed; then he should take cold things like pomegranates and endives and lettuce with garlic, and similar; and eat little, and meat that is moist.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those of cold complexions should take syrup of honey, and moderate old and new perfumed wine, and drink little, and eat little, and small birds and pigeons; and on the day that one is bled, one must drink more than eat; and it is good to give some men a little triacle or musk before or after venesection, to fortify the principal members; and make the blood subtle, but those of hot complexions should not take it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The cupping glasses that are applied without causing injury are those that are placed on the liver, and on the mumps, and on the gout, and on the belly, and the groin, and the armpit, because these limbs do not tolerate being injured on their joints, and it is only done to attract blood from one member to another, as we do when we apply cupping glasses to the breasts when a child is teething; to remove viscosity from a limb, as we do when we place cupping glasses on the belly and the groin to reduce the size of a limb; and it alleviates pain when there is congestion or a stone, and by its attractive power it may draw out the congestion or dislodge the stone; and it does the same when applied to the liver and mumps when there is retained wind, and these cupping glasses are administered empty merely to suck; and sometimes they are used with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water, as in diseases of the pleurisy, and in this manner one fills the cupping glass with warm water alone, or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the fire cupping is thus:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	It is two inches wide and half an inch deep, and it has a small hole in the middle for threading a needle, made of bronze so as not to injure the patient when placed on the body; and there is a crossbar of bronze or iron inside, to hold a candle, and they are both large and small according to the illness and age of those who use them; for the ventouses used by children are different from those used by the elderly, and those used by the thin are different from those used by the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And you must place this ventouse on the body: take the candle of wax or the linen and put it inside the ventouse, through the crossbar, so that the flame is at the bottom of the ventouse and does not burn the patient; then place it on the body, and hold your fingers over the hole we mentioned, so that when you want to, the vapour will go out, and you remove the ventouse. Then take the linen as before, and repeat often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	Therefore, when using a cupping glass for the disease of pleurisy, for all acute illnesses, it has no stem or aperture, and is not removed until it is full of water, and is placed on the affected limb; and this is how it works:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Leeches are only removed when they are in water, and placed on limbs where cupping glasses cannot be used due to their size, such as the lips and gums, and similar places; and on bare skin, such as the finger or toe, and others like them; and the quality of their use is that when you find leeches that are in clear, still water without any movements, you should catch them; and put them in clean water until they become familiar with it and have nothing in their bellies; then they should be treated with bleeding and cupping, then rub the affected limb until it turns red, and place the leeches on top of it; and when they are full and start to move, if there is a suitable place for cupping, apply it, because it is very beneficial.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, then raise the area with ash, and then with water, very well, and then squeeze it; and if the bites heal too slowly after the body of the leeches, moisten a linen cloth in cold water, and place it over the bite until the bleeding is staunched; and if the bleeding increases, place ground vitriol or gall, or similar things on it, until it is staunched; or you can place half a handful of peeled peas over the area, and leave them there until they become warm to the touch, and it will then be staunched; and if you need more, take other leeches.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the leeches will not attach, then rub the area with fresh blood, or insert a needle so that the blood flows out, and then place them on it, and as soon as they smell the blood, they will attach; and when you see that they have finished feeding, then sprinkle powdered aloe and salt, or ash, over them, and they will let go.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is a remedy for fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that the foolish people of this chapter have never seen any of the ancient books, nor have they read any letters; and for this reason, knowledge is strange in our land, for I have never found anyone good at it; and I know nothing about it except through the knowledge of ancient books, in which I have studied so much that I have acquired knowledge, and by experiment, and by the custom of my life. And I have described to you in this chapter what is contained therein, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are introduced, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we should say in the prologue of this book the subjects of speech and the chapters where the wise man directs his understanding, and remains on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain occurs in someone, you should hurry to treat the patient from both sides, if nothing else holds him back, such as weakness of the body, or a fever, or old age; and if the weather is not very hot or too cold. Eat cold foods, that is, cold meats, and deer and goat meat, and do not drink wine, nor consume any fatty foods, and do not fill yourself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you suspect a hot abscess or an eruption of material in the limb; then return the patient to his previous regimen.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, then one must feed the patient foods that promote swelling or have粘性, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and testes, and feet, and calf's stomach, and offal, and fresh fish, and full-bodied wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with much swelling the fracture will be reduced and heal more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And you should know that broken bones in the old and decrepit cannot be well set and joined according to their nature due to the dryness of the members, nor can those who are too tender, such as the bones of young children; but have no worry, reset the broken bone using the large tendons which stretch and join the member together, so that it enforces itself as it was before; and do not stop altogether in his work, and for this one should eat plenty of meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And you should know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from that of the foot, or of the leg; and I will tell you in this chapter about all types of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another in piercing, like the point of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And there is a fracture with a wound, and a complete fracture is a small split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And in each manner has its own remedy and proper instrument for restoration, according to what the memory comes to mind; and it is known that there is a fracture of the bone by the fact that the joint is twisted, and appears well through displacement, and sounds when pressed with the hand; and when there is no twist or crookedness in the touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture; but it can still have a twist, or split, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you must not move it with your hand, but put on remedies that come later, and then now constrain it gently.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And you should know that the fracture that goes in the armpit, and where the two parts are separated, they should now be put back together evenly, so that hot abscesses can come out; and if cold abscesses come out, then leave it for a day, until the abscess is soothed; then put it back to where you can easily and gently, and know that the restoration of the one is easier than the restoration of the one who has pieces; then strain it, as it should be done afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if it is in two parts, whether it is a hand or foot, or your hand if it is a small member, or at two cords, or at one cord and your hand; and put the member according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken member are separated, then bring them back together with all instruments in their places as you can, and be careful that your work does not cause injury or pain to the patient; and join the two heads of the bones well according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel it with your hand if it seems to you that it is not well-aligned: then dress it nicely, and do not stretch or press too much, as those who cause hot abscesses and contractions in the limb by their actions, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is ready, then carefully control the patient so that he does not move it, whether waking or sleeping, turning or in any other way; and be sure that the limb is so secured that he feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, then it is not yet ready, and you must put him in such a position that he feels no pain; and be careful that he is placed correctly so that no crookedness comes to him when he is restored; and the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken members vary in size, shape, and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs: these should be wrapped with soft linen; and for larger limbs, such as the thigh and leg, use a wide, tough ligature, for the wide ligatures embrace the entire large limb and constrict it equally from all sides, so that no swelling remains; then tie around it light bandages, 3 or 4 turns depending on the limb, and tighten your hand a little at every turn of the ligature, then go above the fracture and tighten less so that the fracture is slightly separated; then soften the ligature little by little, until you grasp most of the healthy area, then take another ligature, and wrap again over the broken area; then go to the part under the fracture and tighten gently, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we said in the first hour above; then place between the ligatures lint or bandages, so that they are all even, then tie everything above with a bandage, and then put your splints well-fitted on, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, then apply something hot to soothe the abscess and reduce the swelling; leave it like this for several days. Then stretch out on a board, and let the arms be stretched out straight, the hands and feet turned upwards, and the body bent backwards; let them remain in this position for some time.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But the board that one puts under the dislocation should be a little thicker and wider than the others; it should also be as long as is appropriate for the smallness or size of the limb. Then stretch out on the boards in the same way as before, then tie a bandage over the dislocation tightly but not too tightly, according to how loose or tight the ligature was before; it should be medium thickness, not too thick or thin, and made of soft linen. For if the bandages are thick, as I have seen foolish people do, making the ligatures out of twisted cords, this is a great error, for the ligature cannot be even if it is too thin, and there should also be less than a finger's width of space between each board.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is sore on the head from the stars after the binding, put beneath them linen or woolen bandages so that it does not hurt.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by a fracture, and the bones are broken, I will describe the treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not advisable to extend all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the member is large, you should not put splints on it for more than 5 or 7 days, or longer depending on your assessment of the hot abscess; and here is the method of ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and torsion: take flour that is stored in the walls of the mill, cook it with plenty of egg, and apply this preparation, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it. This is the common method of the plaster that restores fractures in various conditions, especially in women and small children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of plaster for healing fractures and dislocations and twists: take 3 parts each of rosewood, ladanium, myrrh, and asafetida, and 2 parts each of gum arabic and mastic; 5 parts each of myrrh and aloe, 8 parts each of aloes and alechil; and grind them into powder, and mix them with egg white. If the person's complexion is warm, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and it heals broken bones quickly, and is useful for many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of plaster that is good for torsion: take myrrh and balm of gilead, each 10 drams; frankincense and aloe, each 9 drams; acacia 6 drams; Armenian bole 10 drams, and grind well, and cook with water or plenty of egg, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another way to make a plaster for joints and bones that have left their place, and to ease the resulting pain, and to treat the fracture: take new linen and soak it in lard and cooked oil, and apply it to the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not restore, but it is good for soothing hot abscesses and removing pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of plaster that heals broken bones: take dry fig leaves and dead nettle leaves, grind them together, and make plaster.Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. 3; mirre et aloes, ana .v. 3; alechil .viiij. 3; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastement, et vaut à plusieurs homes.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to make a plaster for the restoration of a bone fracture, and to reduce swelling from an abscess:
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take marshmallow root, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, one part of each; and crush, and cook with wine, and if the member is scalded, cook it with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to make a stronger plaster than the previous ones, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of a member:
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of comfrey, and flax seed, borage, milk thistle, and marigold, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of each one part; and grind, and cook with water of salt, or fresh water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hypocrites says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken member to restore it except for cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says that it should be between soft and too hard.Et il dist ou livre que quant aposteme dure vinerent, qu’on doit prendre leveine de vezel, et la broier, et mettre sus l’aposteme, et porroier le membre; et si on le poinget a lor nassance, que li estraint les euelz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naisse.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen says that one should put on a broken member, to restore it, dry things that are a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe wood and incense, and similar things, as we have said.Et qu’on doit prendre le membra par la nassance et le tirer vers le haut et vers les costes en la circuite de la vaine; car il dit que si on tire le membre par la nassance, que li sang veult aler a sa place, ou il est necessere.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of ointment that is good for injury and pain: take mugwort and human hair, or bird feathers, and beaver castoreum, and mix them together, and grind them, and make an ointment out of it and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then loosen it a little after, and take care that the patient feels no pain, nor does the bone move from its place; if not, loosen it by hand for several days. And if pain comes to the site, or itching, with rest or swelling, hurry and loosen it, and remove the plaster immediately; and take light cloth, and sponge of sea moistened in water, and apply it to the site until the itching ceases, and the pain is soothed; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on lamb's wool, dampened in water or rose oil, and bind it with a bandage, so that you are sure of a hot abscess; and let the inflammation of the affected member subside, and the pain be removed, then begin the subtle binding again, and a little of the plaster, and do not tighten it as much as before; and subtly, until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is closed and red and painful and swollen all around, and you need ointment and bandages, then start again as you did first.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	If the limb does not show any signs of what we have described, then do not dislocate it until three, four, five or seven days; and sometimes you may leave it for twenty days, depending on what you observe, as long as the fracture remains open and the bone approaches the flesh; then restrain it more tightly than before, and increase the meat, as I have said earlier. If you see the site drying out more than necessary, know that swelling cannot occur there; therefore, wet it with warm water every time you dislocate it, and do this every third day, and loosen the ligature a little. Thus, swelling occurs in the limb through this method, and it quickly improves what the foolish people do, who restore the limb in a twisted manner: this is wickedness, and such actions are cowardly; I see nothing in them but weariness and doing it correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of the various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many types of fractures, with varied appearances and distinct causes. Some fractures are caused by the impact of a sword, breaking the collarbone all the way to the shoulder socket, just like an ax or a pole; this type of fracture is called a "shoulder fracture.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword cuts the bone without penetrating, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound of these two fractures is large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a concussion, or a splintering, or from the neck of a stone, or from falling on stone, or from other similar causes.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if the fracture is piercing, extending to the membrane below the bone, or on top of the bone, this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound that is set in the bone as thin as a hair, and the crack is small, then this type of fracture is called  "capillary." And if the wound is caused by stone, or by falling, or by a similar object, and drives the bone fragment inward, and the site is hairy like the blacksmiths when they work on the furnaces; then the stone enters within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more often to those with moist bones in the head, like the skull of a child; and it happens with all types of fractures where small fragments are displaced, just like tiles. I will speak about them in their respective places.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all kinds of fractures by their appearance, and by examination with the fingers, and by the corruption of the flesh that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair-like appearance is discovered when one uncovers the bone and rubs it with a finger, then the fracture appears black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, take care with the symptoms of the disease; and if you see any bad signs, such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, swelling, fever, eyes popping out and turning red, and other similar things in various conditions, then it cannot be healed without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a surprising accident, and you hope for a cure, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the child comes to you first, and it is in winter, then you must cut the umbilical cord before the fourteenth day when you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the summer, you must cut the cord before the seventh day, so that the thread under the cord does not rot and cause the accidents we have mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone reaches just to the membrane that covers the brain, then you should split the fractured part thus: and it is necessary for you to grasp the head of the injured person, and remove everything on top of the bone in every way you can, and above the wound more gently than you can, and if blood flows when you expose the bone, or a pus-filled abscess, use the aid that is appropriate; and fill the area with soft rags moistened in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the pus-filled abscesses are soothed, and you are certain there will be no more bleeding; then begin to remove the bone all around, and this can be done according to two methods of operation: one method is that you cut straight down tightly in front, and the form is:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	Then make another cut larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is to have various cuts, some narrow and some wide, and they should be pointed and made of iron; work gently so you do not cut the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard, you must pierce around it, so that you administer cuts with chisels, not so deep that they penetrate beyond the bone; and you should have a margin or circle on top, preventing the point from going beyond the bone; you should have several of these, so that each one comes in its place in the thickness of the bone, and you should have chisels for all tests; and this is the form of the three types of chisels:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities for piercing around the broken bone are that you place .i. probe on the bone and move your hand back and forth until you feel that the bone is pierced; then move the probe elsewhere a little later, and do this all around. Then cut into the space between the holes with an incision, and do this as skillfully and gently as you can, as we have said, until you draw out the bone with your hand or with one of the tools you have, like tweezers or pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sinuses.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have penetrated and split the bone, it is necessary to remove the sharpness that remains from the bone with some instrument similar to an incisive instrument, but it must be more blunt and thinner than the other instruments; and if anything remains of the small bones or any scales, gently remove them with one of your instruments; then cure the wound with tents and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of treatment is that which Galen describes, which is much safer, and he highly recommends it, and his word is final.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first to uncover a part of the bone where the broken parts appear to be moving, and then, when you have uncovered this part, place underneath it the head of this lens-shaped instrument, for that is its shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	Do not cut from one side only, for the part is swollen on both sides, so that the cutting will be towards the bone; then gently tap with a small mallet and gently strike the bone all around, being careful of the membrane underneath; if it adheres to the bone, gently loosen it, for it can be loosened without harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone is not split all the way to the membrane and only cut slightly on top, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to return to that roughness, removing the scales with a very fine rasp so as to have various quantities to apply in each place according to what is most suitable, depending on the work and the shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you walk before great razors, and after smaller ones, and do not cease to do this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair cuts and subtle breaks, you must administer treatment according to their nature; and this is something that is not answered by one who has devoted his study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the sinus is exposed, you should take a linen cloth according to the size of the wound and moisten it in rose oil and place it over the wound; then take another double cloth, soaked in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth, taking care to do this as gently as possible so as not to press on the sinus. Then apply a bandage above it without tightening it more than necessary to hold the wound; leave it for one or two days until the abscess is reduced, then loosen it and apply medicines such as roots of lilies, wheat flour, incense powder, aristologe, and similar substances; make a powder from these and place it on the wound, then apply other medicine that does not sting. Be sure that the wound is clean so that you do not leave any ointment in it or allow any pus to accumulate beneath the membrane of the brain, for when pus gathers beneath this membrane, it causes great harm.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, if no harmful accident occurs to the patient as we have said, for there is no doubt about it.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if darkness does not come from the medicine that one has placed on it, because of its power, then you should take a portion of honey and three parts of rose oil and glue a cloth with it, and place it on the ulcer; then cure it in ways that are appropriate until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose are broken, or just one part, for there are two bones there; and below is cartilage, which does not break, but only bends or twists, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should boil your little finger or a needle, and place it evenly in the break, inside your index finger, and bandage it tightly, so that the nail regrows according to its natural shape; do this gently and be careful not to cause the patient pain with your treatment.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the part above the nose, and the bones cannot come together, then you should put it equal to the head of a rod that is somewhat thick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is of two parts, do this similarly, and try to restore it on the first day if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has subsided, then boil a tent of linen cloth at the tip of the nail where the break is.And if the break is in both parts, then do likewise, but hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth day, once the abscess has calmed down, then boil a tent of linen cloth at the tip of the nail where the break is.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you put on another one from the other side, if the fracture is there; and let the tents be so thick that they fill the holes of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some restorers say one must moisten the tents with butter, and change them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I do not think that is good, but one should wet the tent with egg white and flour; then leave it, as long as the bone is broken, and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes one puts in goose feathers instead of bandages, and then a soft cloth around, and holds the fracture, and blows the patient among; now do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if hot abscesses come in the face while you are working on it, put ointment or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in a poultice of daisy leaves.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if no abscess comes out, then put on a plaster from the outside, of sesame flour and incense powder, cooked with egg white; then put on light pads, and do not bandage it tightly; and if the fracture is small, and it is broken into small pieces, extract it with suitable instruments, then clean the wound, and stop the bleeding with things that constrict, and heal, as with plasters and ointments suitable for this; and if there is no wound within the nail, then treat it with tents, and put on splints until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	from the dislocation of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is dislocated below, and there is no open wound, and the dislocation is only slight, and it is not broken in two, but rather displaced, one can tell easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the break is on the right side, to place your index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if the break is on the left jaw, then place your index finger of the right hand, and lightly plug the break inside, and release it with the other hand, and apply pressure evenly.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jaw is displaced on one side, then you must extend it one part, so that it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement of the teeth, or cracking, then bind them with a thread of gold or silver or silk; then apply cerotum to the broken jaw, and place over it a double drape; and place over the drape a large, well-shaped splint, or a piece of leather the same size, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it in place as tightly as you can, and instruct the patient to rest and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the jaw is changing shape, then loosen it on the third day, and then reset it to how it was changed; and apply plaster over it, made from mill powder with plenty of egg or flour of sisament, after you have removed the cerotum; and place over the plaster a light linen, and if the plasters stick, and the condition of the patient does not change, leave it as long as it takes to heal; many times it heals within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if a hot abscess comes, administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, examine whether any piece of bone has been removed; then remove it carefully with suitable instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, dilate it with flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and there is nothing left in it, then sew up the wound, if it is wide, and put over it some suitable poultices to promote healing.
de la forcele	of the fire
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The collarbone breaks in several ways in front of the shoulder, and the break occurs in three different ways: it can be broken and separated into two pieces, which is the easiest to heal; or there can be a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the treatment is when there is no wound with the break, you must have two assistants: one holds the shoulder where the collarbone is broken, and the other stretches the neck towards the affected side; then use your fingers to align the broken bone so that it is set correctly, with no visible displacement or misalignment.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	If you need more leverage, place a round piece of cloth or linen under the shoulder, as thick as necessary; then lift and gently pull on the collarbone, holding the patient's shoulder steady with your hand, and align the broken bone as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder out of its socket because it comes up easily, then the patient should lie on his back, and place one ear down under the shoulder, and the assistant pulls the shoulder downward, until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then press the fracture with your fingers, and if you find it broken, then you must cut over it; and gently pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot join because of any swelling, then apply the cautery to one of the cuts that you have made in order to draw out the pus.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it should resemble a spoon, and not be curved, and be as wide as is appropriate according to the size of the bone and the extent of the work; and it should have two prongs, as you can see, and one should be wide, and the other narrow, depending on the nature of the wound that you created when you treated the bones; and when you are sure of a hot abscess, cut open the wound, and if the route is small, or if you doubt there is a hot abscess, then pack the wound with linen and bandages according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if a deep abscess comes, moisten a cloth in rose oil and ass's milk and wine, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The stretching of the bone, when there is no wound or fracture, is to place upon the bone the plaster made from mill dust and egg white, and put light sponges on top, and if necessary, place a spear underneath the splint; then take a very large band, about the width of a palm, and place two layers of linen over the sponges and plaster; then take a thin rod, three digits wide and long, and wrap it around the band so that the end of the band hangs down; place the rod upon the fracture, and wrap the band around the neck, and under the healthy shoulder, and under the injured shoulder; then adjust each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the fracture in place, and you clearly see that the rod does not move over the broken bone, reward it every day, and when the ligature becomes loose, tighten it; have the patient lie on his back, and when he sleeps, place a small pillow under the shoulder to raise the joint; thus, the force of the dislocation will lessen through the raising of the joint, or tie the arm to the neck for up to twenty-eight days; then start the plaster again if you see that it is needed, and adjust and leave it, until it is healed; and it is usually healed within twenty-eight days, but some people take less time.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	It sometimes happens that the shoulder is broken or dislocated in a large or small way, and one does not feel it except by touch; then one applies the bandage according to the shape of the fracture, and repositions it according to its natural form, in every way one can; then one puts powder from the mill with plenty of egg white on the site, and light padding, and lays a double cloth over it; then one places a broad and thin splint, a little broader than the shoulder, and if underneath the splint there is swelling anywhere on the shoulder, then one applies that swelling with padding made of linen, so that the splint lies evenly; and then one binds it very tightly all around with a large bandage, so that the splint does not move from its place, and one checks the binding every day; and every time it loosens, one tightens it again, and puts the splint back in place if it has moved, and lets the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder is restored within 20 or 25 days. And when this number of days is completed, one releases the binding, and be sure, for it is not a bone that sets easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone pokes out in front, and not underneath the heart, they cut above it, and the bone, and do as we said in the breaking of the hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The penis is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; it often breaks at the tip.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it inclines downward, and the patient experiences great pain and difficulty urinating and defecating, and sometimes vomits blood, and the hair grows from the broken bone, and he feels great harm.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that the patient lies on his back, and places a cushion between his shoulders, then presses his shoulders, and brings together the two ribs with his hands, and skillfully adjusts the positioning so that the bone is set correctly; then he applies plasters and bandages over the fracture site with a thin layer of salt, or other lightweight material, and wraps it in a cloth, and ties it to the broken bone, ensuring it doesn't move; and he winds the bandage around the body, and tightens it comfortably, and checks every hour, and if it softens, he tightens it; and if it needs to be loosened due to corrosion or itching at the site, or pain or an abscess, he should hurry and loosen it, and clean away any discharge that has accumulated, and reapply the treatment; then he reapplies the plaster, and tightens it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the fracture of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the fracture of ribs only occurs in the thick ones near the back, and at the top inside, and they only bend because they are slippery; and one feels it well upon examination with both hands.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatment is to reset the break evenly, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply the ointment and compress it with a bandage if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of ribs is declining inward, then the patient feels great pain, and stabbing, as well as pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane; and also has pains in his sides, and is short of breath and vomits a large amount of blood, and it is a serious illness, and the ancients held it in high regard.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, in order to push out the fracture.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make an incision for a hot abscess unless one has already formed.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if there is one, then drain it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some say that one should place cups on the site to draw out the inflammation, and this is reasonable; however, there is a risk that the cupping will draw out the vital spirits due to weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some say that one should cover the place with soft woolen cloth in hot oil, and put a tent between the ribs to make the space around it even, then it is cured with a poultice of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient experiences great pain where the bone is poking through the skin, and there is doubt about the condition, then one must split the skin above the broken rib, and place an instrument beneath to ward off the hernia; then one must cut the bone, and gently pull, and then sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat with ointments until healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if heated blisters arise, put wet cloths in rose oil and apply to the area; and treat the site as needed for the blister, and let him lie quietly on his side where he should be, until he is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the fracture in his neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes there is a break in the bones of the neck, and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if he will recover or not, take note if his hands are soft and swollen and dead-looking, and he cannot move or straighten them, and when you prick him with a needle, he does not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that in many cases it is deadly, and if he can move and feel pain when the joints are extended and pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the ailment will be cured if treated properly.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar condition arises in the spine of the back, and you want to know if he will recover or not, take note if his feet are swollen, and if the symptoms are in his hands, and there is windiness and urination without control; and when he lies on his stomach, there is urination without control.Quant il y a egestion sens volonteit sus lou ventre et em dos egestion et ventositeit, si ne deust on leu demourer mais se tu le remets a leu, si ne pot demourer; et quant il est sur leu, si saut egestion sens volonteit.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is sleeping on his back and wants to turn over, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	You should know that it is deadly; therefore do not labor in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if these symptoms do not occur, then the condition is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that you apply an ointment to the spine if there is a hot abscess, using rose oil or the yolk of a hard-boiled egg, until it is soothed; then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and command the patient to rest; and they must not sleep on the side where they feel pain, until they are healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is dislocated, one must cover the wound over the heart; and remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a single stitch, then treat the wound with ointment, until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the cow", place your thumb of your left hand into your pouch, and hold it equal to the other hand in your power, then apply the plaster and the bandage on top, if you need to; then tighten it, and if there is a dislocated bone, do the same, remove it, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	from the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It sometimes happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it does, there will be a slight diminution in size at the head; and they become long and decline towards the buttocks, and cause pain in the affected area, as well as swelling and bruising.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is to extend your hand over the fracture; and know which is the broken part and its shape; and if the break is only at the head, then put the broken part in its natural position.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it inclines inwards, then let the patient lie on his belly so that the restoration of that fracture may be prepared for.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, then put on the plaster, then put on a board of wood or horn, and tighten the fracture so that it does not move; and apply the place under the ribs until the fracture is healed.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if painful abscesses come, do not touch them until the painful abscesses are soothed, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and tighten it as it should be, unless there is some bad incident; and that is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The adjutoires is that which is between the neck and the head of the shoulder; and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of the two methods: one is that you take a rod of medium thickness, according to this form:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two ends with a cord, and hold them upright, and put the patient on a seat; then let him lay his broken arm on the rod, so that it comes to rest, and have a curve of the rod, then lean over something heavy or let the minister stretch it downward; then have the patient apply pressure on the break with both hands together, so that the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that one holds the patient upright, and ties his hand to his neck, then command two ministers, so that one pulls what is above the break with their hands, and the other pulls beneath by one of the cords, and each stretches his part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more difficult, then constrict the ligament below the fracture, and above it, and extend each of the ministers to its part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is close to the head of the shoulder, then you should put one bandage in the middle of the shoulder and the other towards the neck, below the fracture; and likewise, if the fracture is towards the neck, then the bandages should be applied lightly without labor, so that the fracture remains even both on the shoulder and on the neck; then make the fracture even as it should be, and constrict it, unless warm abscesses come about.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if hot abscesses come to it, then do not press until 7 days, and put soft linen in vinegar and rose oil on the hot abscesses until they are soothed; then press it, and the way to press is that you put the ointment on the fracture, then assemble the arm above the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put the bandage, and press above the shoulder, and above the arm, so that the arm is in place of stars, if no thing moves it, or the bone is moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone moves, then use stars, and put a larger and stronger star on the fracture than the others, and let there be between each star 2 inches of space, and let each star be as large that it passes the fracture by 3 inches on each side; then press upon the stars, thus as I said at the beginning of the chapter, above the fracture, more forcefully and less in moving away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the position of the stars, and the constriction, as we have said, at the time that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the hot abscess, let it be bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine the bandage every three days, so that itching or swelling does not come to the site, or the pus cannot come to the member because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	As we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents occur, do not unbind it until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach; and place beneath the shoulder a pillow filled with wool, equally soft, and examine every hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken member does not move, or the bandage become softer; then it will heal through the power of medicine, and give him the food we mentioned earlier, in such a way that the food is very subtle at first; and when he begins to recover, let the food become thicker.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be wrapped for forty days altogether; and then one must loosen it and administer baths and ointment medications to direct the place.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stricture is bad and swollen, it remains wrapped for 50 days or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the broken arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the 'bony', of which one is small, and it is the one that follows the armpit; and the other is large, and it is the one that is underneath, towards the little finger; by chance, only the large bony bone may break, or the small one, and by chance both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, their restoration and healing are easy; but when the large bones are broken, their healing is more difficult and painful than when they are broken all at once.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small bone is broken, it should be extended slightly and set evenly.Et quant li grans fosciles sont brisiez, si convient que li membres est remuiez, et li foscile le plus grant qui a l’estremeite soulevier.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And when the larger bones are broken, the limb should be moved and the largest bone which has the extremity raised up. And if it is the larger bone, then it should be stretched more strongly; he should lie on his back, with his pouch of the hand higher than the rest, and the little finger lower than the other fingers, and have the affected side crossed over him, and a pillow in front of him higher up so that the patient does not undergo any labor; then extend the minister's arm at the part below to his hand, or to the wrist, and another minister above it.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then he puts the mirror in front of him, according to his best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the break there are pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is any dislocation that grabs the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as we have said before, on the bone and the artery.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it singularly in this chapter; take the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of the restoration boils appear, then apply a poultice made from cerate of rose oil and white wax, so that it is neither too hard nor too soft; and bind the poultice gently on top, until the boils are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the cerate, and apply the plaster made from mill-powder with egg white, then put on the splints, and let the splint on the fracture be a little stronger and a little larger than the others; and know that he must have six splints on the arm in various positions: let the fracture be in one of the bones, or in two; and press harder on the fracture than elsewhere, and always less as they heal, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages on top of the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or rough; and let the thread used to tie them be made of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And examine the limb and the joint after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, you should wash the limb with warm water until the itch is relieved; and let the limb not be pressed or restrained from resting.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then restart the stretching, and if the joints are softened and the bones separated, address it accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if one is wary that the nourishment cannot reach the member because it is too tight, then one must loosen it a little and leave it thus for some days, until the nourishment flows, and then tighten it again.Et se li os se desevrent, si covient qu’il soit estrais adés fors; et li norrissemens ne peut venir au membre por ceu qu’il est trop estrois.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have described happen to the patient, then do not release him until 20 days have passed.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Or, if nothing else happens to the patient, then he can wash his hands and neck, and let his neck be even, and guard against movement and exertion, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is healed in 30 or 35 days, and perhaps in 20 days, depending on the mixture and the complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that in the back of the hand and around the fingers there are few fractures, and only swelling comes from it many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or swollen, the patient should sit upright, and extend his arm in front of him, keeping his elbow bent at a right angle; then he should place his hand on a flat surface, and the practitioner should straighten the broken bones and bring them into alignment; then they should apply the poultice and bandages if there are no abscesses, and then put on a splint according to the size of the injury; finally, they should wrap it in a single linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is in the peritoneum around the navel, make a sponge out of cloth, and instruct the patient to hold it to his broken navel; then hold it with a long piece of cloth, and the stamp should be as large as the palm of your hand, and you must hold it firm, as it should be.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the forearm, you must place a stamp on top and another one underneath the wrist so that the hand is open and straight; then tie it all around the arm and stop the bleeding between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture is in one of the fingers, if it's the thumb, set it straight as it should be, and hold it with the palm; and if you see fit, place a small straight stamp to raise the fracture, and don't move it; and if the fracture is in any other finger like the index or others, set it straight and tie it with the adjacent healthy finger; either tie them all together while holding them steady, or place a stamp on top as you would on the thumb; take care in the healing process and in the application of a hot abscess, and treat any wound that arises, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of a broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The thigh bone is often broken, and one can see this when it turns front and back; its restoration is to bind one ligature above the break and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then extends each bandage to its part equally; and this is when the break is in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, then one of the ligatures should be towards the armpit, and the other ligatures below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And also if it is near the knee, then the ligature should be on the opposite side of the knee, and the extension should be downwards; then the surgeon should put the bone back into its natural alignment with his two hands, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, unless an abscess forms there.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it calm down and then return to your work and treatment; the bandage is done in this way.The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	You should wrap a long, folded bandage around the fracture two or three times, and leave any excess, then bend the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the thigh, and tie a long string between the thigh and the leg on the opposite side of the knee, and have the ends of the string come up from above; then go back over the leg and the thigh with the bandage, then place splints on top of the fracture, and put one splint on top of the bone in the leg; then tighten the space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to adjust the tension, then start tying the two heads of string that you have tied between the leg and the thigh three or four times over the fracture; and the more you go up above the fracture, the less you should tighten it; then feel the two heads of string that you have tied, and tie three splints that are on top, then return to the bottom at the foot end of the string, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this, so that no abscess or swelling or other sign develops.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If an abscess develops, untie the bandage and address what has formed, as we have said many times before. If there are pieces of bone protruding, they should be removed if possible; if not, then the area should be slit open and drained, then treated as described until the wound is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	Sometimes the thigh or arm may be broken in this way when splints are used, as in the case of a dislocation; nonetheless, the treatment described will not harm the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And you shall know that the thigh is restored in one day or a little less or more, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the back of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the kneecap there is little fracture, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is only a crack or a perforation; and it happens in every wound, whether with pain or without, and everyone feels it.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is to put equal pressure on what is torn at his fingers, as long as it can be; then put the ointment, and if necessary put a round splint, and bind it as it should be, then observe all the dispositions that we have mentioned in other fractures, such as hot abscess and similar; then put to each accident what it needs, as long as it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the break in the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called the "mustelz" and the other the "foscile". The breaking of these bones is treated the same as that of the arm, and the operations are the same in both cases. And if both bones are broken at the same time, the leg turns completely backwards.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the subtle bone is broken, then it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen clearly, and it turns inside out.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Therefore, use extension, and set it straight, and tie the splints evenly; but if the fracture is ugly, and there are several pieces, then the extension should be lighter and easier; adjust it according to your skill.Et s’il est brisie de la partie du bas, et ne peut demourer a son leu, si convint que li ramonnes la dislocation premierement, et il i a grant dolor.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have finished your work, then take two strips of wood that span the leg from one side to the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee to below; then wrap two bands around them above and below, and tie it in the middle, and at this time the leg cannot bend to the right or left, and so is well; and some administer a splint as long as the leg, and it is made of wood, and they put the leg into it to prevent movement, and properly apply it to the break where there is pain; and move the leg every day to see if there is any hot abscess or other accident; and treat it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	from the break of the bones in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no break, but at times a break occurs in the bones of the foot and also in the two small bones, and there is only bruising with various dispositions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	If it happens to the leg bones that they are broken and you see the bones on top of each other, then put the patient's foot down on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, and then put your foot on top of his, where the bones are raised, then press them until they return to their place; then apply the ointment and poultice on top, and under the leg in the abdomen, a small piece of wood with two smooth sides, then bind it to the leg, then wrap bandages around, and other things you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And after three or four days have passed, loosen the binding, for you will find the bones even if they are broken or displaced.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if one or more of the fingers are broken, restore them as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then put on the broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little wider, then put under the foot that small piece of wood I mentioned before, and bind it tightly; and if there are one or two or more broken, put on each finger a splint according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and bind the wood tightly under the foot; and let the top of the wood press firmly against the abdomen of the foot.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things I have said about other breaks, from what we have already said; and treat each case as it should be treated.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone of the finger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bones of a woman's pelvis are broken, make her sit up straight, then lean forward to the small of the back, and hold her from behind. Then fill the vagina with cotton wool, and place a finger inside; then stand the woman up, and gently rock her back and forth, and the cotton will pop out as it reaches the opening of the pelvis, and the bones will return to their correct position with the finger. And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished, insert it again, and do this for seven days; the break will be healed. Then take a bladder from a lamb, and tie a tube to the opening, and blow into the tube until the bladder is inflated inside: the pelvis will return to its correct position. Then fill it with cotton wool, and leave it for several days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the shoulder of man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said in the case of the hip-bone; and these fractures are not hidden from him who devotes attention to his art and studies my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fractures indicate in many ways the right way to restore them; understand this therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	For a broken penis, take a goose's gullet and insert the penis into it; then wrap it tightly with cloth and leave it for three days, checking on it every day, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as in the thigh or shoulder or similar, to be bled immediately, so that the bleeding we have described can attest to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound bleeds, then apply Vitriol, if you have nothing else, and then restart the healing of the fracture in that same hour or that day, if no abscesses come from it.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses come from it, then leave off the healing until the next day, until the abscesses are settled, and do not touch them on the third or fourth day, for you would bring about a bad accident by doing so.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible on the uncovered chest, you should gently put it in place with your hands, with a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not apparent to you so that you can put it in place with your hands, then use this instrument of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and the width is according to the size of the wound; and for this, it is necessary for the surgeon to press down on it three or four times, depending on each case of a broken bone; and let it be round and slightly thick, so that it does not bend during compression on the affected limb, and let it be sharp in front, and thicker from the middle forward, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called «palainche», because the curved head of the bone should be placed upon the prominent end of the other bone; and it is put in once, so that it may come back, and be even with the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot well seize the bone, then you must shave the head of the bone, so that the instrument may have hold of it.Et se li os sont troves et la chair adessuz, si convint que tu le traies a la corde, tant ke la chair soit sus l’os; car ancil la corde ne poait apeler li os, et non li os apeler la corde.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then cut into it with an appropriate instrument, either a chisel or a knife, to your ability; and then pull out what remains in the bone of splinters and tiny shards.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is moved back into place and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	Then make sure it is in its proper place, moisten the cloth with black wine, and cleanse the wound if it has become soiled; do not apply ointment or anything else to the wound that would cause pus and corruption to form; then apply a poultice after you have reset the bone, leave the wound exposed, and cover the surrounding area according to the size of the wound, being careful not to restrict the wound with the bandage. This is what foolish people often do, causing death or corrosion on the patient at times; and the pressure should be softer on this type of fracture than on others.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is deep or large, and you fear an adverse event as we have said, and you feel pain in the area, then do not apply a poultice; but wrap around the wound, instead of a poultice, hard pieces of cloth, and tie them tightly.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days a swelling on the wound, then remove what you have put over it completely, and apply an ointment that heals wounds, such as an ointment of four-fold remedy and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you should loosen the bandage on the limb twice a day, in the morning and at dusk, until it is healed and closed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And one must prepare the limbs in such a way that the bowstring runs smoothly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they persist for many days, and it cannot heal but keeps dislocating the bowstring, know that there are small pieces of bone causing this, so you must probe the wound with a hook and remove all these displaced pieces that cause the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula or any other kind of corruption appears, you should treat it according to what he says in the chapter earlier.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when a bone is broken and open on the limb, such as the thigh or shoulder bone, and similar large bones, do not treat it at all, for many die from it, but leave it to heal over; perhaps it will fall out after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	And when a bone is broken on the limb, and the limbs are dislocated, you must reset it to its place and hold it as long as you can; and if it will not stay in place, then you must reset it, but it is not good for it to be too long dislocated.
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Many times after the healing of a fracture, especially when it is near a joint, an unsightly appearance results in the limb; and by chance, the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take heed therefore if the patient becomes constipated: use astringent medicines like aloe, incense, myrrh, and sarcocolla, mixed with wine, egg white, or garlic; place them on the wound as poultices and bind them tightly, leaving them in place for several days; then remove the bandage and repeat this treatment until the swelling is reduced. You may also apply a plaster made from finely ground stone to draw out the inflammation. If the injury has turned into a hard lump like stone, and it needs to be removed, cut away the superficial tissue and excise the excess growth. Alternatively, you may refer the patient to a surgeon who can remove it, healing the wound afterward.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb that is weakened after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is healed, but the limb remains weak and delicate, this can occur due to several reasons: one reason is that it was bound too tightly and not properly; another is that there were too many ligatures, preventing nourishment from reaching the limb; or due to excessive bleeding; or from too much movement, especially before its time; or because there is a lack of blood in the body, resulting in weakness.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you should make the patient eat, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied within him; and administer to him baths, and give him joy and leisure; then apply pitch to the limb, so that the pitch attracts the great swelling, and frequently moisten it with warm water, until the swelling goes down into the limb; and restore it to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	then the limb will become straight again after recovery
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after recovery and the broken bone is exposed, and the shape of the limb is deformed, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function; so do not believe the foolish who say that one must break the limb again completely, and many fools have done this in our land; and these actions are blamed, and great harm may come from them, and even death; all the same, if the dislocations and wounds are fresh, then one should apply warm water or herbs which soften, such as leaves of plantain, and roots, and mallows, and similar medicines that soften the swelling; and make an emollient ointment, such as thyme well prepared, and you take the mucilage of plantain, and cook it with suet or sisam oil, and apply an ointment to it; or you take figs, fat them with hog's dung, and grind similar medicines that soften the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the joint is dislocated by constantly rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let the limb be moved every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the crookedness is woke and hardened like stone, and needs to be cut out with iron, then it must be covered up to the bone, with a sharp incision made lightly; and put bandages and study into the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to someone, one must now bring it back without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the place will swell and sometimes it is reset in its place; therefore one should not move it at the hour when it is swollen: many times it causes inflammation and other pains; nevertheless, when this happens, let the patient be bled, then left alone until the abscesses are soothed; then bathe the limb with hot water and oil, then reset it gently, and cure each member as the cure will come to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations from the head to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Then the jaws become dislocated, and the dislocations of both are according to two manners: either they are a little pushed out of their places, and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the bottom, and saliva flows from the mouth which he cannot hold in, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is enveloped in speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns through several dispositions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is complete and accomplished, then you should reset it quickly without tarrying; and let the assistant grip the head of the patient, and plug his ears with his fingers from one hand in the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if there are two parts of dislocation; and let the other fingers be straight, to make them equal; and instruct the patient to soften their jaws and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And she looks at the mirror, as long as it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the jaw is dislocated, especially if both jaws are together, then they should be treated with hot water and oil, as long as they are gently reset; do not pull hard to reset it, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back into alignment and the mouth of the dislocation is closed well without softening, then put it on moistened cloths in cerate made of rose oil and wax, then tie it lightly with soft ligatures; and let the patient sleep on his back, and keep his head steady between two pillows so that he does not move to the right or left, nor strain to yawn, but take light food until the pains are relieved and the jaw is healed; then let him eat what he likes lightly, and do not exert himself to open his mouth to eat and drink until the jaw is well sealed and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be returned to their place in an hour, and are not converted to their own place, then fevers and accustomed sods come, and by chance a solution of the belly, and by chance vomiting pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then you know that it is destruction; and many times the person to whom it happens dies within eight days.If the mandibles are not reduced in time, death will follow, as we have seen happen many times.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceless one cannot dislodge it from the ribcage within its path and from the foot, and it is dislodged sometimes by force, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then press the area firmly with your palm, and it will return to place; then put on the ointment and bandage, and tie it tightly; and the shoulder which is towards the neck cannot dislocate; if it does, and it dislocates at any time, then reset it to its place as we have said; then put on the ointment and bandage, and tie it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed; and in the same way the shoulder of the spleen is reset when it has been dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: one, it dislocates at the part of the axilla below; the second is at the part of the foot; and sometimes it dislocates above, and this happens rarely; and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor inside for the nerves; and often it dislocates below towards the axilla, especially in those who have little flesh, for in them it pops out suddenly; but in those who have enough flesh, it pops out slowly and goes back in slowly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to some men that they have a concussion or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of that.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Then you must test it to make sure, and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And you will know the dislocation when it is below towards the axilla, and there will be a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a manifest diversity between them; and you will find a pit at the top of the shoulder, and under the axilla at the top of the shoulder, just as if it were an eye; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move in any way; and also, if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you will see it clearly at the top; and this type of dislocation is not difficult to fix when it is new, or when the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is for the assistant to lift the affected hand up, then place their fingers under the shoulder, and forcefully lift the joint upwards in its place; and the assistant lifts the hand and extends it upwards, then places it back down; this should be done quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	If it does not return within a few days as we have said, then the patient should be bathed in warm water and given soothing and softening poultices, such as decoctions of alder, fenugreek, and milkweed in water; then the patient should lie on their back, with a layer of equal wool beneath them, neither too soft nor too hard, and place their heel on the wool, and lift the shoulder blade gently, and draw the hand of the affected side; while another assistant holds the head of the patient so that it does not move downward; this shoulder will return immediately, and if you see that it is dislocated again, do it according to this manner: have a man who is larger than the patient stand present; he should be straight toward the hip, push the shoulder blade underneath the affected side, and lift the armpit so that the patient hangs from the arm; then another assistant draws the hand of the affected side downward toward the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the disease is too slight, then one can put upon him some heavy thing, and the dislocation will return at once.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And it is reset in another way also: one takes a long wooden peg which is as thick as the palm of the hand and neither too big nor too small; this is placed beneath the patient but covered with a thin cloth, and the patient should stand upright while this is done; then his hand is extended downward on the other side and the joint will return to its place at once; and if it does not return despite all these things we have said, then do this cure: take a peg two arms long and four fingers wide which has a pointed end so that it may enter deeply beneath the shoulder according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then tie a soft cloth to the tip of the brand so that the brand does not strike the patient; then place it under the shoulder joint of the patient, and extend his arm above the shoulder, and tie the shoulder to the brand, and the arm at the hand, then place the arm on a wooden board, and extend the hand downward, and let the body hang on the other side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, however it may be, you must then place a woolen ball under the joint, then apply the prepared plaster of flour from the mill, with incense and egg white, over the entire shoulder and around, then tighten it under the joint gently, and tie the string over the plaster, and embrace the hand to his chest, and let the hand remain like this.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he eat little, until the limbs are healed, for he will heal faster; and then eat more after five or seven days, and move him; and if he is stiff and not柔軟, then he is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has come out of its place because of moisture or for any other reason, then you must administer cauteries to it in three places, as is described in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot lift his arm upstream, then know that the nerves at the head of the shoulder are cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocations which are towards the bottom, and in the breasts, or behind, are made by pushing and stretching with the hands, and one administers it elsewhere; and heal until it is healed.Et si li nerf ne puet estre en son leu, adonc covient qu’il fie estrit a la coine, et li membrez remuez, et li nerf estenduz; et si il n’est pas sanez, adonc covient que tu le vives, et le menes en li lieures; et si il ne puet estre en son leu, si covient qu’il fie estrit a la coine, et le membrez remuez.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing there is cramping in the limb, and later with movement, then the patient should be bled many times until that cramping is relieved and returns to its former nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the shoulder joint
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You should know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated by pins, and it returns by pins; and if it is dislocated from all sides, and especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not reduced, for one can see and feel it well; and it dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick neck with the healthy one, then you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is broken, and he cannot bend his arm, nor touch his shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must reset it as soon as the abscess has broken, for if the abscess breaks, it will be painful to reset; and by chance it may not be able to be reset at all, especially when it is in the back; then it is worse than other dislocations, and causes more pain, and by chance death may come.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it can be reset, that you extend his hand with your two hands; and let his arms be spread out, and his hands from the wrist according to the elbow, around and underneath, and push the joint into its socket at the base of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in the front, it will return when he bends his hand towards his palm, and puts pressure on the wrist which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if he does not want to return to his place, then he gives strong extension; and there are two ministers who extend the arm, and they hold it so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm from each side; and when you have wrapped a long, wide cloth around it, and the minister has joined the joint with his hand, then anoint the joint with some oil to soften the joint, then press the joint firmly until it returns; and when it is in place, apply a dry plaster with egg white, and stretch it firmly, and bind the arm to the neck of the sick man, and leave it for a few days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, loosen the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not setting well, repeat the plaster and the bandage, and leave it for a few days until it is set firmly; then loosen it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	If he feels pain after the joint is moved back into place and it becomes immobile, then bathe and rub it gently, and press until the pain subsides. Or, place a fat sheep's pad over the joint, leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and have him enter the bath; and when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the pad back on, and then enter the bath again; do this two or three times until he is healed. If you see fit, place warm cow manure with butter on top, and hold it in place; then it will return to its natural state.
li dislocation de la main	dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand is healed, and the return is lighter than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place gently, in the same hour that it was dislocated, so that the joint is swollen or an abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	The procedure for moving the joint back into place is to have the patient lay his affected hand on a table, and extend his fingers; then you look at it and move it until it is in line with the joint, as if he were placing his palm over the joint itself, and you adjust it until it is aligned. Then you must check that it is in the right position; next, have him place the back of his hand on a table while you extend and flex his fingers.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, let the patient lie his hand on a table, and the surgeon place his hand over that part where the joint appears.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it now goes back into place, that is good; if not, then strain it with soothing poultices on the affected area, and leave it thus without trying to move it again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it and you cannot put it back in place after several attempts, then let the joint remain out of position; and do no harm to the patient until his hand is strong again and he can grip things once more. Then you will know that either the nerves or the arteries are cut; there is nothing else to be done but to strain it with fire, close to the affected area.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, apply the plaster that we have described, then hold it and leave it for five days, then loosen it and leave it like that.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is any swelling, then soak it in warm water and rub it until it is healed.Et s’il a aucune estresse par la main, si le moille d’aigue fraiche et le frote, et met sus l’emplaustre que nous avons dit; car il ne doit pas demourer longuement en tel estresse, mais estre remu en aigue fraiche, car il n’est pas bon qu’il soit longuement en telle estresse.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the fingers are dislocated on one side or the other, sometimes at the back of the palm or at the base of the hand; then you must draw the finger towards the affected area and hold it there; leave it for two days, and then put it in line with the rest of the hand that day. Do not let him use his hand for anything, as we have said, but just move it; do this often until it is healed. Do the same if it is dislocated at the base of the hand, and do as described above until it is healed.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	the dislocation of the spine in the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine in the back or neck is dislocated, there is no treatment, for death comes quickly.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the evacuations occur without voluntary effort, and one cannot hold them back; and often a limb is paralyzed, in either the two legs or the two arms or one; and often the skin turns black in four places: that which turns black at the back is called 'paralysis': the cure is that you must find out whether the paralysis came on from childhood; if so, there is no cure for it nor any hope of recovery.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient authorities describe at great length, but I have abridged it according to my understanding and have devised instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in paralysis which comes to the foot in front, there is no cure nor health; and also that which comes directly to both sides, and one cannot cure it except by the one which comes directly at the back, as I said; and it must be that the patient lies flat on his face in one place, and has a support under him so that he does not bend; then insert the cautery iron into the ground at the head, and another at the feet, and tie a string under the seat of the paralysis, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles; and two attendants hold the strings, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the two cautery irons; and they must be tied tightly, the cautery iron as we have said, and the attendant puts his palms on the spine until it comes back.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return with this treatment, take a table three yards long, and lie under the wall, and let the patient be on their side, and put the head of the table under the wall, then place the middle of the table on the spine; and let the patient put their feet on the other end of the table, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see it, do it again in the turn that turns to the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And you should put two torches at the head of the patient's arm, and two others by their feet, and there should be between each torch, above and below, a palm of space in length; and there should be in each torch a hole, where the thread turns, and the torches are firmly in the ground so that they do not move; and between each two torches there is a turning torch, on which the threads turn, and there are two small torches at the turns, each a palm in length, for turning the thread; and then tie the thread that is among the pegs to the thread toward the head, and the other thread toward the feet to the other thread, and each of the ministers turns their thread to all the thread, and the master places the spine evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, then put on a desiccant plaster with an egg yolk, and then the poultices, and then the cushion of a pillow three fingers thick, which colors the area of the swelling and the healthy part of the spine; then tie it with a bandage as we said before, and use the patient's subtle cooling medicine until he is healed. And if anything comes at the end of healing, one should administer softening and soothing medicines with the cushion we mentioned earlier. Sometimes they give them a piece of plywood, and sometimes the appearance comes in the back on the spine, and people think it is dislocation; but it is the bone that protrudes, so one must not presume to touch it, for it could bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and the shoulder only come from dislocations, and not as with other joints; and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and most inside, and slightly dislocated in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation within is such that when one joins the affected leg with the healthy one, the affected one is longer, and the affected knee joint appears more than the healthy one, and the affected one cannot bend his knee towards the fire; and the part that is nearby is swollen with a hot abscess because the head of the thigh bone has come there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes as a defence, is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him who it happens to in front, are that his leg is well according to its accomplishment; nevertheless, he does not bend the knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot go before, and he retains his urine, and the veins swell, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who it happens behind, are that he cannot bend or straighten his knee, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the veins are softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place under the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The remedies for this kind of dislocation are that you examine whether the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its condition, then there is no cure for it; and it must not be allowed to become stiff.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for that which is the fresh dislocation, and it is of the four kinds of dislocation, you hurry to return the joint to its place, and stretch it both inward and outward, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will return, and does not need any other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this way, you must prepare a strong minister, and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or with a cord tied above the knee; and another minister stretches his hand over in such a way that he pushes his hands under his heels, then he is bound with a strong cord over the thigh; and another holds his head with a cord; and they stretch upward and downward all at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground at once and remains pendant.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of stretching is common in four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, you must apply a bandage to his appearance. When the dislocation is in the buttocks, you must lie the patient on his healthy side, then place the bandage over the root of the thigh, and the part under the hip, then stretch the bandage upward toward the hip and the armpit; then another minister grabs his arms and embraces the large part of the patient's thigh, and stretches it forcefully outward: it will return to its place now; and this type of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	If you cannot reduce the dislocation in the manner we have described, then you should bind both feet of the patient together with a strong suede thong around the heels and knees; the affected leg should be extended two handbreadths further than the other. Then let him be suspended from a pole, with his arms hanging down two cubits from the ground. Then command one assistant to grasp the head of the thigh firmly, and another assistant, hanging alongside the patient, to grasp the thigh forcefully, for the joint will now return quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is reduced, let the patient lie as we have said in that which concerns gout, and tighten the thong around the leg and foot; then put two torches, one at the head and one at the feet, and place the torch between the thighs of the patient in the region of the groin; and have moist bandages laid on, so that he does not scorch himself, then extend each assistant away from him, and the surgeon should apply pressure evenly over the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns to place, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, then place him on a table and press it as we said before in the section on dislocations, and lay the patient on his healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the sick leg gently, and according to what I have said; and put the one looking at it on top of the sore shoulder, then press with the other hand, and they lean down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is outward, then one must not extend the patient downward, nor lift him up from the ground, but he should be as if his hip were dislocated outward, as we said about lying on both hips; and he should lie on his face, with the bandage stretched as we said before, and someone should press upon the joint on the table; and when the patient extends his legs, they should be even, then adjust the thighs and apply the plaster, and tighten it with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and he should rest for three or four days, then release the bandage and apply the plaster again; and if you see that they are even, then tighten as before and let him rest for three days, then release the bandage and let him walk comfortably until his limbs are healed.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is, inside, outside, and behind; it is not dislocated in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at his thigh, and if it does not straighten at his thigh, then know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all such cases is that you make the patient sit up straight, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his face, and put his foot on your feet; then take his knee in your palms, and pull between your fingers, then bend both sides of the knee firmly; and another minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that it straightens his leg at his thigh lightly; and apply the plaster, and let the leg air-dry at the thigh, and keep them together tightly for three or four days, then release it; and the patient should not exert himself by walking until the limb is healed.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if there is no joint, then strong extension must be administered, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes crushed, and sometimes fully dislocated, inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it hurts when pressed on the affected part; the movements are slight, and one should gently extend it to their hands when it is only dislocated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is healed all over, then you should make the patient stand upright, and press the leg firmly down on the ankle; then pull the foot towards your right hand, then your left, twice each way, and then stretch it upwards, and draw it up firmly; do this twice as we have said, by bending and stretching the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, repeat the procedure, because it will return; and if it still cannot be returned in this way, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and push the peg firmly into the ground between his buttocks, and wind cloth around it so that he does not move; then press one minister against the thigh, and another extends the foot towards their hands or the knee, which they hold onto the neck of the foot; then extend each minister equally, and the pegs are still between the patient's buttocks to hold him in place as they are stretched; then put the mirrors evenly at their hands, and one minister pushes the healthy leg down from below, and the dislocation will quickly return.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it has reached its peak, then place the plaster and padding on top, and tighten it firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, and be careful of the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the ligature is not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligature loosens, then tighten it again; then untie it after three or four days, and the patient should be able to walk within four days; and if he walks before this time, there is no guarantee that he will not relapse.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a hot abscess comes, you must calm it down as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	of the arms
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the arms are dislocated, they should be stretched gently without force, and that is a minor issue.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in the lower back or foot, then you should make the patient lie flat on his back on a bed or table, and place your foot over the affected joint, then press firmly on your foot until it pops back into place; and when it is back in position and there is nothing protruding, place a board with two crossbeams under the sole of the foot, then tighten it firmly, and leave it for three days, then untie it; and have him rest until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation and you want to restore it, many times the patient dies; so do not be presumptuous in the treatment if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it for long, nor pitiless and merciless, and do not be bold. Use hot abscess-calming remedies at first, and leave the patient in God's hand if you see no hope of recovery; but when you see hope, then immediately return the limb to its place so that the hot abscesses may heal; once the limb is in place, administer hot abscess-calming remedies and treat the wound as it requires with drying ointments. If there is fracturing and small bones are displaced, set the bones and do what we have said for simple fractures; and beware of taking a path of fear, as I have said, lest you suffer much according to your Creator, and for the sake of your soul and body.
Amen	So be it.
