O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, very dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine together with its fulfillment, and I have made an end through its explanations and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And in a vision it came to me that I would complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hands, namely 'surgery'.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of the hands is neglected in our region and is unfamiliar to all, it has been lost, and nothing remains of the ancient knowledge except for small descriptions in books that have been handled by hand.Et quanque li fuers ne puet estre prescheve par les livres ne par les uers, et n’est riens quere demore, si convient que le corps soit traittre en la cirurgie, et li fuers estorbes par les mains, s’il poait estre.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity, closed intentions, and alienated knowledge.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Here I seem to want to give life to it together with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the tools of cautery, and of other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And one who undertakes this must surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as far as he knows the judgment of members, and forms and conjunctions and separations of veins, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews and the number of teeth, and the movement and of their veins both moving and resting, and from where they originate.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And therefore Hypocrites says that he who knows the name is much, and with the work is little; and likewise in the art of the hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before, must be careful that he does not slip into error and harm people; just as I have seen many of those who interfere in this science and then abandon it without knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish doctor who lanced an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and he also cut the arteries in her neck; so much blood issued out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another doctor who treated a stone in the groin of a man, and the stone was large; he carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.Et vis un autre qui copa une veine de brasse d’une femme et li donna tuit li sangs qui estoit en la veine, si que la femme cheit morte adont.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I saw another who lanced a vein in the breast of a woman and gave her all the blood that was in the vein, so that the woman died then. And I had already been called to treat her, and I saw the nature of the disease and the size of the stone, and if they cut it out she would have died then.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another man who had broken his leg treated by a doctor from our land, and with the break there was also an open wound; and the ignorant doctor bound up the fracture on top of the wound with a splint, leaving the wound uncovered, and instructed him to keep it that way. As a result, the leg became badly swollen, as did the foot, and both ended in gangrene.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to attend him, and when I arrived, I hastened to release the leg from its binding. When I did so, he felt no pain and was at ease.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	However, the corruption within the limb had already set in and could not be healed; and the decay continued to spread throughout the limb until it was entirely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another doctor who lanced an abscess that had become infected due to the negligence of his lord.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	Because a ulcer, when it is pure of melancholy humor, one should not touch it with iron unless it is in such a place that one can completely remove all that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And so, dear son, you need to know that the work of the hands is divided into two parts: namely, where there is danger in many situations; and I will show in each section of this book where there is doubt and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For this reason, you must be careful to avoid the foolishness of evil-speakings. Take up your arms in confidence, and approach your ailments with ease and firmness, using the best methods so that by God's grace you may achieve salvation and be praised; leave behind the terrible maladies of grief and disease; remove your armor from whatever causes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may pass from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in some of his warnings: "Do not take on any illness lightly, lest you be called a fool.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have arranged this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cautery and medical cautery, and it is ordered from the head to the feet; and of the forms of instruments, and of cautery tools, and all that is necessary in the craft.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cold cautery and medical tools, and it is ordered from the feet to the head; and of instruments and tools, and all that is necessary in the craft. The second chapter is also about cutting and piercing, and cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and it includes the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torques, and similar things; it is ordered from the head to the feet, and includes the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus, as we remember the work, it is fitting that I describe the nature of aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the most lengthy speech and subtle knowledge, and the secret responses; and the majority of sages spoke about this and agreed upon it; and I am satisfied with a little of their words, for I abhor lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery aids universally in all complexions where there is matter, whether it be the .ij. complexions: namely, the hot complexion without matter, and the dry complexion without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions together with matter, some people say that cautery is of great aid; others say the contrary: that cautery does not help in diseases that arise from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	Because fire's nature is hot, it should not be treated for hot diseases with heat, nor for dryness; and those who say otherwise state that cautery helps a great deal in hot and dry diseases that affect the human body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	Because when you compare the human body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this opinion.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found this to be true through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And yet, one should not practice this without first having experienced it oneself, and knowing through long usage the nature of cauteries, and the diversity of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and their outcomes and the pace at which they progress; we have no fear of treating the other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the physicians agreed and concurred about the use of cauteries.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my son, that a cautery combines fire with the secrets of healing, and is of greater benefit than a burning cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	Because fire is simple, and does not harm except the member which is burned, and does no harm to any other part if properly applied.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Burning medicines spread from one member to another, causing disease in the body's good health; and sometimes they kill the patient. The fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not do this unless there is an excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found by experience and through the length of my service and study; and I stand upon the truth of things - therefore I excuse myself for the length of my words, for it does not please me to take from you the secret that is reserved for fire, and the quality of its work, how it cures diseases of the body, as the philosopher explains in his demonstration. So receive this in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on which days cauteries should be performed, and chose a suitable time.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harmfulness beneath is removed by the aid of cautery; and especially when cautery is for necessary pains that are urgent and cannot wait until a time when greater harm might come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear son, as the foolish believe; for there is no recurrence of the disease that is healed by cautery; and they say it is so, but it is not as they think, because cauteries are not medicines that move the complexion, and dry up the humors that cause pain, and are worth more than other medicines for their swiftness in action, and for the virtue of their work and significance.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease may sometimes depend on the complexion of the patient and the location and nature of the disease, and are assembled in him due to the consumption of food and similar things, unless cauteries are administered where there is little excess humors and moisture, as with tooth cauteries for pain, and similar things; but this rarely happens.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last resort of medicine; but it is true. But they do not believe that cautery is better than medicine; their intentions are false. Cautery is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment for any illness and they do not work, then we administer cautery and it does work.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is clear that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cautery with a gold instrument is milder than with iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of gold or because of the height of its substance; but they said that the heat of the cautery does not cause blisters, but this is not true, as I have experienced it, and have found that it is true in some people; and cautery with gold is milder than with iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet when you heat the gold instrument, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down immediately; and if it is heated too much, it will bend in the fire; and thus there are many difficulties.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this we use fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have arranged this chapter from the head to the feet so that the way is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is useful for moisture and coldness on the head, and there are two reasons for it being used in a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for many diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by a solving medicine which purifies the head for three or four days, depending on what the strength, age, and condition of the patient can bear; then have the head of the patient shaved again.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then have him sit cross-legged in your lap, and place his hands on his knees; then place the root of your palm between the roots of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two middle fingers meet, it will bleed—then heat up the cautery, which is called "olivare", and this is how it should be used:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the spot marked with ink, and move your hand up and down while squeezing gently in a circular motion; then lift your hand gently and check the area again to see if there is any bone exposed; if not, then repeat the cautery as I have described until you do see bone. Then take some salt and place it in soft cotton, and apply it to the wound; leave it for three days; then apply an ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until the wound is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And according to the ancients, when a wound is left open for longer, it purges more effectively; and because of this, they recommend using leeches.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some say that one must leave the cautery in place until part of the bone is burnt, and then have the burnt portion of bone removed and the wound healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one must apply the cautery and press so hard that one dislodges a portion of bone as wide as a woman's thimble, in order for the humors to flow out; then leave the wound open for a long time; after which one should cleanse and dress it.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And I do not consider these two methods of cauterization to be entirely good for anyone, except in cases where there is fear; and I prefer to leave it as it is, for the shoulder is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, just as we see in other members; and likewise when the shoulder of the patient is weak from nature, and the first appearance of cauterization seems better and gentler to me, so I use this method together with it.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of headache
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When a chronic headache comes and lasts a long time, the patient should use herbs and pills that are called 'cochie', as well as cleansing of the head with oils and poultices. If they then receive the cautery that we mentioned earlier and it is ineffective,
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the sick person is not too cold in nature, then cauterize them under this cautery a little bit as we mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After that, cauterize each horn of the head up to the bone as we mentioned earlier, and also cauterize in the place called 'vessel'; there is a spot for which cupping glasses are placed; ease your hand so that you do not reach the bone, as the patient will feel much more pain with this cautery than with the others, and I will speak about it later. The cauteries on the horns should be finer than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and here is its form:
dou cautere dou chief	of the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain arises in the head and the disease extends to the eye, and the shoulder is purged with purifying medicines, and the other treatments I have described in the section on diseases have been carried out, but none of this helps: then cauterize according to two methods, that is, with medicine or fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	For the cautery with medicine, take an egg, remove the shell and coat it with a mixture of honey and vinegar, and then apply it to the shoulder where the pain is located in such a way that you can place the egg underneath the skin. Then, after it has been applied for twelve hours, remove it and treat the area with butter until healing occurs.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment with ointment until it is healed; and if you see fit, use some of the burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth section on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is done in this way.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery until it is hot enough to use.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called a "close" because the chief is made in the form of a cloak, with a small curve at the top, and in the middle has a small appearance; and he puts it over the painful spot, and holds his hand and twists it slightly, so that half the thickness of the skin is burned; and lifts his hand so that the artery does not burn, which is deflected, and an abundance of blood flows.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	Afterwards, he puts cotton in the wound, and keeps it for three days; then he puts moistened cotton on the wound until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this hemorrhoid with the cautery called  "cultellare", do so at the very tip, and be careful not to touch the artery in this hemorrhoid which is not old.
de emigraine	of a hemorrhoid
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you cure hemorrhoids as we have previously described in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cauteries previously mentioned in medicine and fire do not help, then you must heat the cautery called   "cultellare" until it is white; and thus sign on the painful spot a line half a finger long, and lift your hand once, and press so that you do not touch the artery and so that it does not reach the bone; and be careful of the jaw so that it does not bite when one chews, and let the nerve have no regard for the bite and let no spasm come to harm, and be careful of the blood flow from the artery when it is cut, or the cutting has great fear and especially for someone who is not experienced and untried; and leave the wound open in the middle; but I will tell you how to stanch the blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it opens in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the wound in the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have described in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has .ij. knives; and this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain in the ears from coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is pain in the ear from cold, and one has applied dissolving medicines and other remedies that we have mentioned in the previous chapter, and the pain does not go away, then heat this cautery, which is called 'the point', whose composition is as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After puncturing all around the affected ear, or around both ears if the pain is in both, and then move slightly upward from the root of the ear after you have identified the site to be treated; and there should be .x. points around each ear; afterwards, treat the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	There is no cautery for those torments which are caused by flujoes of blood, as we have said in the sections on diseases; and no cautery should be used for conditions that originate from dryness or inflammation of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this type of mouth torture caused by blood flujoes and discharges from the head, and gargling does not help, then you should use three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another just above the temple, and the third on the junction of the two lips. Apply the cautery to the area that appears healthy, and also cauterize the top of the ear, about a finger's width below the horn of the head, and another cautery above the temple, as long as a finger. Leave the cautery in place until half of the brain is burnt; this is the shape of the cautery instrument:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is similar to the scalpel we described earlier, but it is a little more slender, and the blade should be a little thicker. After treating the area as described, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient has a fever, then do four cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one at the place called 'vassels', as we have said before; and do the last cautery over the mouth of the stomach. And let it be treated as we have said before.
de litargie	of litharge
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient large and cleansing pills for the brain; after that, wash the head of the patient thoroughly, and apply the mustard plaster which is described in the book of plasters to the back of the neck; and here is how to do the cautery: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is healed in this way, it is good; and if not, do three cauterizations in the middle of the head going down to the neck, with a distance of two fingers between each cautery; and cure him as the others, and if you see fit to adjust, and the patient is suffering, do one cautery in the middle; and if it is necessary, do two more on the two horns, and cure him as before. And let the cautery be what is called 'olivare', as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of chill from the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to cleanse the head of hair and of that which we have previously discussed; after washing the head of the patient, then make cauterization in the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you have more need, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is strong, make four cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave it until the heart is burned most, and lift your hand; then cure it until it is healed, and use the cautery which is called "olive" that we have discussed before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use cautery except for those who are phlegmatic; it is necessary first to cleanse the brain of hair and other remedies that we have discussed in the division when the patient is great and suffering from taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot bear it, make him gargle and chew, purifying the brain often with good meat; then press the head in milk, and make .i. cautery according to what we said before, and .i. cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the disease is forceful and painful, make cauteries as I said for the one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive according to the manner that I described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the disease is in a child, make him  .i. delicate cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When through the cause of melancholy there are corrupt humours and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with part cauteries as we said for the one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if through the cause of melancholy the superfluities are declining towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink that purifies the brain, according to what has been described before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you have bound the head of the patient; then make a well-fit bandage, as a circle, and place it around the head; and let the patient cross their arms, and be held tightly from all sides; then apply the liniment, and use the fat of an old ram; and heat it gently over fire so that the person can bear it; then remove the bandage from within the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient once a week with good governance until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or, if you want to cauterize it all over, make several small points on the end of the cautery tool.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This cautery method softens the cerebrum and increases moisture; afterwards, apply wet cotton wool soaked in butter or goose grease.
de l’awe des eulz	of their eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When awesomeness first comes to the eyes due to the signs I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient drink that cleanses the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make them sweat in a bath several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he commands him to hold his head steady, and he cauterizes in the middle of the head, and makes .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples if the descents of the eye are both together, or .i. if the descent is .i.; and close all the veins and arteries that are under the heart with the cautery, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of blood letting, and if you see too much blood issuing out, then stop it as best you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	I will teach you the extraction of arteries and incision under the two bones at the back; and sometimes cauterization or hatereil is done under the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	of the body from tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears from the eyes are old and habitual and are on the veins, or within the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outward; and one sees that it is from cold phlegmatic superfluities, then he makes the cautery that I said at the beginning of the eye descending to the eyes: .i. cautery in the middle of the head, and .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples, and .ij. cauteries or hatereil under the .ij. bones; and if there is a need for more, then he cauterizes bleeding above the eyebrow with a small cautery all over .i.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	where the body weeps inside them
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat him according to what we have said in the discussion, and he does not improve, then give the patient three nights of poultices; after that, shave his head and cauterize the middle of the cautery with olive oil; and make two cauteries called "clavilis" on the two sorces, one just below the hairline; and be careful to avoid the artery so you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the membrane of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with the tool called "olive".
de coi ci est li forme:	It should be shaped in the following way:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see two sorcerers, make two cauteries on them as long as the sorcerers are; and do not leave off with the hand until a third part of the paper is burnt, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that pokes the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes the hairs of the eyes are turned towards the inside, and poke the eye, and they make cauteries according to two manners: that is to say, with fire, or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a healthy position; after that, draw on the paper the shape of the leaf of the myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be among the hairs; then put wet cotton in egg white and mustard seed paste on the eye, then heat the cautery so that it has this shape.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, cauterize little by little according to the shape you drew, so that the skin is burned in the right place; and the sign of the health of the eye is that you see the paper lifted up, and the hairs raised at the tip of the eye; then lift your hand and leave it like that for three days, then put wet cotton in butter until the burn is healed; after that, treat with ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after that the hairs grow and the paper becomes soft, then start the cautery in the same place again, just as you did before; and if the hairs are torn, cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural level, and even, and do not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make parchment into the shape of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and live coals, of each one-third, and grind them together well; and do it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it over the shape you made like the myrtle leaf, and put under the eye cotton wet with egg white; and if the disease is in one eye only, then operate on one, and if in both, as well; and put under the eye cotton wet with egg white; and let the patient's head be in a healthy position and put your hand showing over the medicine, and press a little and move it all the time that the patient feels stinging from the medicine, because he feels stinging just as from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the bite has healed, lift up the eyelid, and check if the membrane has been lifted as well, due to the constraint of fire or from an incision; if it is, then all is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, apply medicine to the area again and keep doing so until your actions are equal, and your eyes aligned; then apply wet cotton wool in butter until the burnt area is cool, after which cure the area with ointment called  "dyaphenis" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to take care of your work very carefully so that it does not leak into the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then restart the medicine on that area which has softened from the paper properly, just as you did before; after the cure until it is healed; and this is the form of the myrrh poultice:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of humans are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this are your constraints; and do not be reproached for the straight path to one who has the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	on the treatment of fistula with cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have described in the sections on diseases, and your treatments are not effective, then you should use cautery according to the following method:
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head on your lap, and hold their head steady so that it does not move or turn; then soak cotton in white vinegar or pepper juice and place it over the eye; next, heat the cautery which should be shaped like a pen, with a pointed tip, or like a tent; but overall, the cautery should be curved for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Then press the fistula if it is open and drain any pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, open it and draw out the fluid; next, place the hot cautery firmly on the oil gland, holding the cautery at the spot below the eye where the nerve is located, taking care not to cause pain; apply the cautery directly to the grease of the eye gland and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of cautery up to the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then restart the cautery again, and repeat if necessary, and leave it for three days; after which, put wet cotton in butter on it, and treat it with the drying ointment until it is healed, and if 40 days pass and it is still not healed, then apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and treat the king accordingly depending on what happens in his condition.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that some of the ancients spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	To treat a fistula, open it up and clean the wound; then insert into the opening a thin piece of linen that has been shaped accordingly.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make the amount of a bean; and hold your hand or the cotton firmly, so that the patient does not move at all, so that the molten lead does not run into his eye; and one should put on the patient's eye wet cotton in olive oil or in water: the lead melts the fistula, and heals it miraculously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we mentioned, that is good.Si li fistule ne fuist saine, et met en la fendure un pafre de fer de coi li fistule est venuz, et le met tant que li pafre soit en la fistule.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If the fistula is not healed, insert an iron probe into the opening from which the fistula has emerged, and push it in until the probe is inside the fistula. If that doesn't work, you must administer an enema to the nose, and bring the fistula back towards the nose according to where it should be in its proper location.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cracks occur on the lips which are called "hair", and especially on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have described in the sections, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small scalpel according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it gently in the cracks until it reaches the bottom; after that, treat the area with ointment until it heals.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess occurs in the root of the throat or the uvula, or the palate, or the roots of the teeth, it causes swelling and rot and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have described under 'Fistulas', but if it does not heal: then you must have a cautery according to the size of the fistula; after cleaning out the fistula's opening, hold your hand steady so that the hot iron reaches its depths; do this once or twice, after treating it as we have described in 'Treatments', until it is healed. And if it is cured thus, then it is good; but if not, you must open up the area and remove any decayed bone, according to what you find in his throat.
dou movement des dens	movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it does not help, then put the head of the patient in your lap; after heat the cautery, which will be described below, in such a way that you place one end of the hot cautery on the tooth; and hold the other end of the cautery over the root of the tooth, and keep your hand steady so that the heat reaches the root of the tooth; then remove your hand and re-heat the cautery as needed; after fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and let them gargle for an hour.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way, the tooth which was loose is made firm, and the soft gums restrained, and the corrupted moisture dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of toothache
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from coldness, or there is coldness or swelling, and medical treatments do not help, then cauterization is needed in two ways: with a cautery made of butter and with fire cauterization.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization with butter is done by melting butter from a cow, and the end in a spoon made of iron or brass; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and moisten it in the butter, and apply it to the aching tooth until it cools down; and do this repeatedly until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. If you see the wool and cotton moistened in the cold butter, and apply it to the aching tooth, and place a hot iron on it so that the fire reaches the gum of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The fire cautery is performed by taking a piece of iron or bronze, as thick as the opening of the fistula so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient; heat up the cautery so that its shape emerges and place it on the tooth and hold it there until the cautery cools down. Repeat this often as the pain will be relieved either that day or the next day.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary for the patient to fill his mouth with good butter quickly before this cautery, and then let him spit it out; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery on whichever tooth you want, according to what you are able; and this is the shape of the rod:
des scrophules	of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofula is of phlegm and cold moisture, and is not subject to digestion through medicine, then heat the cautery iron according to the following form, and it should have two openings for the smoke to exit from the other side; and apply the hot cautery once to the abscess where it is needed, so that it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, use the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days; then moisten cotton with butter and apply it to the burn until the scrofula is healed; afterward, treat the wound with ointments and bandages until it is completely healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture prevails over the channels of the lungs, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient should first be purged by solubilizing medicines; after that, cauterize at the root of the throat, and beware not to come up to the throat, but only burn a little at the heart.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, do another cautery at the joint of the neck at the head of the spine, and let the cautery be called "clavicle", of which we have the form before us; and treat the area as we have said before until it is healed. Quant li malaides est voidiez de la moitor qui en li chief et au col et en la gorge, adonc covient que tu remettes la dislocation dou col s’il estoit desaloie; car si il esteit desaloie, si ne puet demorer a leu mais querre le chief.
de la toust	of the tongue
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all diseases of the lungs are due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is chronic, then make two cauteries on the breast in their usual places; and another cautery in between the breasts; using the cautery called "clavicle" as described earlier.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see [it], make cautery in the place to all cauteries which are called "points," whose form is mentioned earlier in the illness of ears; and let the points be up to 30, or around it.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	Afterwards heal the place according to what was said before, and let the cauteries be in three lines according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for this reason, cauteries are gentler when you do them three times.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, treat the patient's back and sides with fomentation; then gently press the heart, which is inside the chest, with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery that has two tines like a fork, here is its shape:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the chest until it pierces to the rib, and the figure of the cautery will appear with four cauteries; and for this reason, a cautery is made with the cautery that has three prongs, so that the figures of cauterization are six cauteries; and the nerve follows the subtlety of a tent, and this is the shape of the cautery that has three prongs:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is adjusted above this one nerve, so that there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After placing the crushed porridge on the cautery, let the patient rest and not move the limb for a long time until he is well healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, which happens rarely, then make cautery on the thick part of the cautery-clavicle, or many cauteries in points.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and moisture is eliminated and the illness is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and moisture come into the stomach, causing pain to its nature, and there are many catarrhs in him, and he does not benefit from customary treatments, then you must pour water on his back, and stretch out his legs and arms.And if he vomits with difficulty, do the same.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From this then you shall make three cauteries, one under the heel of the foot in the quantity of a bean, and all the cautery clavicle, and two cauteries apart on both sides so that the form of the cauteries is at three angles, and there is space between them so they are not joined together when they rotate for pus; and the cauteries shall be deep enough to pierce the two parts of the heart, and the form of the cauteries according to this shape without adjustment.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you want to cauterize a large cautery in the stomach according to this form, and whoever has fear of this cautery, cauterize in pointing and mark on the stomach i. point according to the quantity that you want to put in; then cauterize all the cautery which is called "poins".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound we have described above, once it has healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver experiences pain from cold and moisture and excessive wind, having been displaced from its natural state by superfluities; and when the patient is treated for this as we have described in the section on wounds, but does not experience any improvement, then the patient should be placed on his stomach; and three cauteries should be applied according to this form, figure, and quantity over the liver, avoiding the hypothalamus, at the location where the armpits of a man would be; and there should be the thickness of a thumb between each cautery; and the cauteries should be long, not pressing hard with your hand on them at all; and only half of the cauteries should be burned at once, and the patient should lie straight on his stomach; and if he cannot do so, then he should lie down with his legs stretched out and his arms hanging down.
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you desire it, cauterize with the iron cautery, being skilled and wise in the art, and beware that you do not scorch the whole body; for you would cause the whole body to become dry. And let it not come to a boil, for the heart is very delicate in that place, and you know it by sight.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you wish to know whether it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the pain is not too severe; but if it is in the membrane, the pain is violent.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then when this treatment is applied to the bumps, the patient should be lying on his back; and then sign with oil the place where the abscesses are, and then heat the cautery which is similar in shape to a radish, from which comes the form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize with the cautery until the warts are burned, and go as far as the syphilis, so that all the roots are destroyed; after the cure, according to the method of the bandages, until it is healed; and one must not use this cautery on anyone who has not studied long in the art of medicine, and by whom these diseases have sometimes been cured.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore he can work boldly, and nevertheless it seems to me that it is better to leave it.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of a cautery of phlegmon
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should do cauteries of phlegmon with roots of aristologe, and in such a manner: take a long root of aristloge as thick and long as your fingers; moisten it in oil and heat it in the fire, and cauterize. Perform 1 cautery between the chin and neck, and 2 small cauteries slightly lower in the area below the beard; and 2 cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, declining slightly backward; and 1 cautery on the breast, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two at the sides of the breast away from the cautery between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but do it gently as when applying a perfume.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And some ancient people said that a man should use a cautery made of iron like a razor, heat it and place it between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess; and if there is pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear for the patient, who may die or develop a fistula that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouth
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the illness of the moon with what we have said in the divisions of treatment, and it does not help at all, then there are three methods of cauterization that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of these methods, one is to make III cauteries, or IV, by lining up according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the cautery of the liver that we mentioned before; and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient be careful on his back; and another method of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has II nerves, as we showed in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the currycombing where the mouse comes towards the left, and let the elevation by which you lift the currycombing be according to the currycombing, according to the length of the body, and the cauteries according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After that, insert the II nerves until the currycombing is pierced on the other side, and then draw away the cautery, and so there will be IV of them. And if you see fit, cauterize at all the cautery with III nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cautery when it has healed for a long time, and this one is better than the other cauteries mentioned before.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not good for hydropsy, except in the way that is called "asclytes.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then you should do 4 cauterizations around the armpit, and one over the stomach, and one over the liver, and one over the groin, and two behind the back on the spine, and one at the tailbone; and the cautery should be close to the ribcage.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	Afterwards, leave the cautery open to drain for a long time, and do not cease treating the patient after the cautery; healing will hasten, and the two intentions will come together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly should be the clave as we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is shown here before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in hydropsy and filled with yellow water, you should cauterize between the little toe and the ring finger on the top of the foot; and move your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not go in too deeply, thus you will avoid the yellow awl, and the cautery should be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	Afterwards, make 2 cauteries on each leg, one below the knee in front and the other above, midway up the leg; and leave the cauteries in place for a long time without cleaning, until the water comes out; then clean this as we have said regarding the other cauteries.
de la menoison	of menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When diarrhea comes from coldness and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive power in the stomach and intestines is weakened, and cannot be cured by any means of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly with a strong pulse, then make one large cautery on the stomach according to what has been said above about the cautery on the stomach, using a circulating cautery; and four cauteries around the belly with a thin cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see an abundance of moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the shoulder, and one cautery on each elbow, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good support.
de la cure des emorroydes	on the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are in the anus, one or more, and are old and consist of thick cold and moist corrupted humors, and have been treated as we have described with division, but are not helped, then apply cauterization: III on the spine of the back, that which is completely outside under the rectum, poke and poke in a triangle shape, and cauterize two underneath the buttocks; and if you think that the stomach is cold, and the food is not digesting, and one sees swelling in the face, then do one large cautery on the stomach as described earlier, and another on the liver, and another on the mouse with a whole cautery clavicle; and leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After curing the site until it heals.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness that is called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you scrape the thelul, use a cautery that looks like  .i. razor, and then put it all ablaze on the scraped thelul; and let your hand stay so that the cauteries reach the base of the vein, from which the blood flows; do this once or  .ij., and if there is a lot of thelul, cauterize each one as we have said. After curing with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on a wound, it will have more help.
de plaie mal curee	of an improperly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will discuss in its place, then such a disease comes that it cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is a fistula and it has a pus discharge and corrupt moisture, then you must probe it with a thin rod and be careful to feel how deep the rod goes.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery that resembles a razor, insert it into the fistula according to the amount that the rod went in, and repeat the cautery until the pus and corruption are burned, once or twice or three times, according to how much they need; and be careful not to burn any nerves that may be nearby, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	if the fistula goes into the bladder and intestines, then be careful of those areas, and only do this on fleshy places, and think that they are not sensitive; after curing the site until it heals, and if the site is swollen and the matter is not discharged for a long time, then know that the site is completely healed; and if the matter is not discharged, know that the site is pierced and the bone at the bottom is corrupted; and thus as one of those we will say in their place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When cold pain comes to the kidneys, and with violent winds, and it does not take talent from a woman, then you should apply cautery to the kidneys on one side and the other with the clave cautery that we mentioned earlier. And if we cauterize it in the middle, it will have 3 cauteries in a line, and they will do more good.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, and the patient retains urine, then one should cauterize the part above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic region emerge, both on the right and left, and each cautery should be as long as a man's thumb; and one should also do another cautery below the back, or two if you need them; and the cauteries should be flat according to the previously mentioned shape.
de la marris	of the mouth
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the mouth is cold and moist, and it cannot conceive, and the buds are corrupted and their terms are delayed; and when they come, one feels great pain: then one should do three cauteries around the mouth, as we have said for the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries below the back; and the cauteries should be flat, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends to the socket of the hip, and because of this it moves out of place, and the sign is that the leg is longer than the other when measured together; and the places of the dislocation are found wet, then you must cauterize the dislocation on the hip with a 1. cautery resembling a circle, and mark around the socket as it turns, so that the socket is within the circle; and the cautery should be like those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present, make 3 large cauteries of the olive oil, and let the cautery be as deep as all the scabs; and treat it until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the hip pain
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip joint, it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured by what we have said in the division, but the cure does not work, and the disease is old: so you must purge the disease of gross humors with fetid pills, or other good-smelling pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the incision, apply a cautery; there are two ways to do this: with burning medicines or with fire cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cauterization can be done in many ways, one of which is to make three triangular cauteries on the hip joint according to this pattern, ensuring a deep and wide incision with a distance of about an inch between each cautery. Sometimes, a cautery is also made in the middle of the hip, resulting in four cauteries according to this pattern:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you wish, cauterize with the circular cautery that we mentioned earlier in the dislocation of the hip; but do it so that the circle contains the whole hip, and all the thickness of the heart is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	This is the method used for sciatica, when the pain is located in the hip and does not travel down to the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	If the pain extends to the thigh or near the knee, two cauteries are placed where the patient feels the pain, and three cauteries are made on the ankle, slightly towards the left side. The cauteries should be cutaneous, burning through the thickness of the skin. If the patient feels pain extending to one or both feet, three cauteries are applied using a tool called "poins.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if necessary, do more; and if he feels the pain below the knee towards the thigh, use a knife or circular cautery, and be careful with all your cauteries that you do not leave it on so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who had cautery applied to the ankle of the foot, and they left it until the leg was completely swollen, and the foot too, and it became pierced and corrupted throughout the foot.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a stomachache which caused his death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, apply cautery to one and then the other, according to this method.Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise men said about cautery for the hip, whose method is as follows: make an iron tool and it should be at its tip as large as a thumb, or a little less, and it should have teeth in between, spaced out by the amount of a finger joint; and the teeth on both sides should be like knots, and it should have a good handle. And this is the shape:Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantitat d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is all red and dripping hot, and then put it on the box of the hip that hurts, and turn it to the healthy side; and cauterize it once with one cautery and leave it for 3 days; and then use a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the ointment is cured until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use this cautery sparingly due to fear of its appearance, and we see few who use it; nonetheless, it is one of the good cauteries which those who can bear it should apply where it is needed.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cauteries of medicine burning if you make the instrument to interlace in which it descends the margin of the door, and is made of bronze or iron with a long side, and at its height has two notches, and has between each the thickness of a fingernail; and are open underneath and above, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing the box of the hip on the patient lying on his side, and pressing your hand firmly on the box of the hip; after pouring between the two circles of hot wax which is heated in the fire for a moment, and let the patient endure the heat and burning for an hour.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it treats the bite as well as the fire; and when the biting is over, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip gently, and let it be so for three days, and apply butter until the blackness of the scald is gone; and leave it for three days more to form a scab; and this would be the final aid after the treatment of ointments until it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or to the leg, you shall make the instrument that colors it according to how you made it in the hip joint; and this is the way of the hot dye, and I have written it in the treatise on the rectification of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkaline and quicklime, as much of each, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Then have a small hole in the pot so that the point of a needle can enter; and place on top of this pot another pot well sealed, and put over the alkaline and quicklime, and pour over them the hot dye, as before, until it reaches two fingers above the powders when you have well moistened it with your hand; and let it stand thus until it drips down into the sealed pot, then take all that dye, and pour it over the alkaline and quicklime again, as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then there will be great pain and it is administered in the moisture of medical treatments and in cauterizations of other members For it does evil work as fire, and so with other medicines that one cauterizes well the hip thus as thistle and honey of anacardium and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a cure whereby a man was cured of the pain in his hip and sciatic nerve, and he praised it highly, saying that nothing else was done to him, but that he was cured at one time when this treatment was carried out, and that he then took a bath as instructed below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he described how one must take green and dry litarge, and grind it finely with a little tallow, and apply it to the hip and thigh and leg where there is pain, and let it lie; and leave it for three hours, and by the time the patient no longer feels the burning, remove it.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then let him enter the bath until his body is a little aroused, and let him enter the bed, and the pain will leave completely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such medicine after an evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's dung, it helps a lot; and the cautery must be done in this way:
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take lamb's wool and grease it with old oil, and place it in the socket between the big toe and the one next to it, which is called the sciatic socket.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Then take dried goat's dung and take it to the fire until it turns to charcoal, and place it on the lamb's wool and let it sit until it is cold; and do this again, and do not stop doing this until you feel through sensation that it has reached the hip and the pain has ceased; and this method of cautery is called "goat cautery.
de la dolor dou dos	of back pain
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When back pain comes from sitting or impact or excessive evacuation, or due to cold matter spreading, in none of these cases is cautery beneficial except for that which comes from the infusing of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary, after the patient has voided foul pills or other similar substances, to place a fire mark on their back where the pain is located, marking three lines intersecting at right angles, and in each line .v. cauteries or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can bear; and the cautery should be performed using the cautery called "pin"; and if you wish, perform .iij. cauteries or .iiij. with the medium cautery tool according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a tight chest when they wake up, and fear; and you will find it in the lower spine in the back and in us the appearance that comes over the other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and cure it, cauterize it with the hot iron according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery purples each part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery two or three lines apart, and have the points close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	Afterwards heal the site until it is healthy according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply cautery in gangrenous areas that are in a nerve ganglion.
de la dolor des jointes	The vertebrae of the neck are at the base of the skull. And when you want to cure the spine, if you cannot get the spine to be healthy according to what we have said, then cure the area where the strain is and do not put the cautery on it, because the nerves are close to the head.
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pains are caused by moisture that is spread throughout the body's limbs, and when pain comes in the feet, which they properly call "podagra," and when it is caused by cold and cannot be cured by medicines, then it can be treated with cauterization in this way: make a mustard cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-colored according to this formula:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is a need to prick the sole of the foot, then do cauterization all over with the "point" cautery.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains go up to the knees and other joints, and that happens many times, then do cauterization on each knee in three or four places in every part, with the whole olive-sized cautery; and if you need more, then do more, but don't hold your hand there any longer than until the skin of the heart is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and back, administer the cautery that we have described in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make marks around the little finger two lines; and if the pain remains in the arms, make marks on each joint and on the palm of the hand; and if the pains come to the knees or shoulders, cauterize every part, and apply good treatment to the patient and take medicine.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give him good treatment and purge the phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rotgut wound
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When rot occurs in the groin, and the testicles descend into the scrotum, which is new, then when you see it being cured, he should not eat that day; and he should use things that loosen the belly so that the farts come out of his belly. After this, let him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath until the testicles are repaired, and bring them back to your fingers, and mark an inch below the rot over the bone of the groin, and at all a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery with which this is done:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it is white and it oozes pus.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bowels to their place; and have the patient hold his hand so that it does not return; and work on the thighs of the patient, and put a cushion and a servant under each thigh, and another one under the penis which holds the hands; then apply the cautery to the sign all around your hand, and hold it firmly and do this until you reach the bone, and if you don't reach it the first time, do it again until you reach the bone; and be careful that the bowels do not protrude when you are doing the cautery so that you don't burn him or cause other harm to the patient.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And you should know that when you do not come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And the cautery for children should be thin according to their ears, and for adults as large as appropriate; after 3 days, dress the site of the cautery with butter until the scorch is healed; then dress it with other ointments until it is healthy, and have the patient lie on his back for 40 days so that the wound is well closed; and their clothing should be loose enough that they can move around without pain.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after 40 days, when he wants to stand up, have a well-made bandage ready for him, and wear it for another 40 days; and let him have good rest, do little work, and avoid excessive drinking, eating, and shouting; and if he follows these instructions, he will be fully healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will now describe the treatment for cutting on his shoulder.
de la routure dou ventre	from the disease of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ulcers come in other bellies and are recognized, and you see that they are not growing any more, then make the cautery with the hot iron according to its quantity, and burn the third of the skin; after the treatment, as we have said; and some of the ancients say that one must cauterize it with a three-pointed iron according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the place of entry and draw a line across the width above the ulcer, and one from side to side, and hold your hand steady throughout the cauterization.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cautery is lighter and gentler.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in a limb, from falling or from injury, and the pain lasts a long time, and medical treatment does not help, then it must be cauterized with the iron that is called "point", and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb, its thinness and weakness, and its distortion and pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If it is healed from the first cautery, that is good; if not, do another cautery on it, for such is the custom that it should move in the member that is nearest to it, therefore you must do the cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	from mixing
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The ulcers are sometimes helped by cautery with great difficulty, especially those that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	When you see it being cauterized, be careful whether the disease is in its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not return or linger, and you doubt that the corruption may spread throughout the disease, then do five cauteries on the head: one in the middle of the head, and one towards the front at the end of the hair; two on the sides, one behind on the nape of the neck; and let your hand be so that the cautery reaches the bone, and as far as the scabs come out so that the vapors of the gross humors can come out; and cauterize the mouse according to how it is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the disease is scattered everywhere; and it is manifestly lost, then you should cauterize it with these cauteries that we have mentioned in the head, and one cautery in the nose, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large cautery on the croup, and another one next to it, and two cauteries on the two shoulders; and two cauteries on the armpits, and two cauteries on the tendons of the feet, and one cautery on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and be careful of the nerves that are on the back of the heel, so that you do not burn them; and sometimes a cautery is made on the bone of the wrist, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more you do of cautery, the more it does good, and moves the profit; and know that the patient feels no pain from cautery as the healthy do, because the body is already entirely corrupt.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and the joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	Afterwards, clean the site with flour from wheat with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes in any member and is cured by medicines, oils, and poultices but is not yet healed, then do cauteries on the member according to its size; and let the cautery be somewhat cutting into the thickness of the skin; then cure it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes cautery is performed on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that causes the limb to be mute, and thus if swelling is removed; and nevertheless no one should intervene unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves moving through the body.
de albaras	of poplars
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" occurs, and medicine does not help, then cauterize it with a moderately deep cautery according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed and the color changes; then treat it with a poultice of equal parts of barley flour and lentils, mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood from the intestines and blood of an almond tree; bind it all together and apply it, keeping it in place until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of cancer by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When cancer appears at its beginning, and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with a cautery that looks like a circle, all around the edge of the cancer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And nevertheless the wise say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the cancer; and nevertheless I do not think this is good, for I fear it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have indeed seen this happen sometimes; and a more sure thing is to cauterize around it, with a cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling which cannot subside
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it is slow to die due to the excess that it creates or due to old age when the illness is decrepit (that is, too old) and he has little blood, or because of the season; and you see him hastening to die: therefore cauterize around with many small cauteries by pricking; afterwards let it be thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten to death.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing all the way through, then heat the cautery with which it was formed:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the heart, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels them driving out in such a way that the course of the illness is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Afterwards, treat it until it is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cautery by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	There is another type of disease that is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a corruption of a limb, for it corrodes the limbs just as fire burns dry wood.Si tu vois qu’ele est corroyssans, et li membres ne fuent pas troz lons, si covient qu’il soit treffez entor de la maladie par cauteres petis en tel maniere que li cauteres s’entrecongnast en la porriture, si com il adouce la maladie.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a place that can withstand fire cautery, then heat the small and large chisels according to what is appropriate for the location of the disease; after cauterizing it all over, until you reach the healthy tissue underneath, and none of the corruption remains, so that all that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and apply soft bandages with oil on the cauterized areas until the burns from the fire are healed, and all the corruption is removed.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After that, treat it with ointments that generate warmth.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that the warmth has not disappeared, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains of the diseased areas.Et s’il advenist que li cauteres ne puissent estre appliees sus la jointe par cause de douleur, adonques tu le faiz mettre en leu ou il ne sent point dolour, et si faiz li cautere; car il advient souvent que li maux sont eschaudez sus les membres qui ne sentent mie la dolour.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this swelling has sometimes been cured by a medicine poultice in place of fire cautery; but nonetheless, fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already described the cure for a medicine poultice in the section on poultices: take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of warts that appear on the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that from the feet a disease arises which is called in our language "clot", and it is a large diseased mass that blocks the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this disease has two methods:
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cautery and hot water cautery.Or cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulx qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery requires the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the area with an ointment that promotes healing until it is cured.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by going through the body, and often occur in the hands and feet, then you should administer a hot-water cautery; it is done like this: take a copper or iron needle, or a pen knife, and place it on the nail and the nailbed, that is to say, warts; and place the needle so that it pierces all around the edge, then put a drop of hot water, and hold your hand steady, and press your hand as you turn so that the margin of the needle reaches the root of the nail, and can find the hot water a deep path right to the root; then let the patient endure the stinging of the hot water for an hour; then leave it like that, and it will be pulled out by its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another, until you draw out all those who are in the body, then heal them of the wounds that cause pus.
li cure dou trembler	the cure for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone trembles from coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever or other, then you should make four cauteries on their spine, one cautery between each spinous process; and one cautery on the penis, and one over the stomach with an olive-sized cautery; this will cease the trembling and hasten the healing of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of stinking pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes they appear as sores on the skin, or as foul pustules, which come from putrid humors.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	if necessary, when they first appear, one should make a cautery on the top of each pustule: with a thin stick of myrtle wood, the tip heated in the fire, or a long root of aristology, or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning, according to this manner, and they cannot grow any further, but the excess from which they come is disrupted, and they are healed; but it must be done after bloodletting.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great flowings of blood from the artery which is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cautery of a limb, and similar things; and it is a very sad thing to stanch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet when this happens to someone, you must hasten to place your index finger over the wound of the vein, and press it very hard until the blood is quietened beneath your finger and no more drips out; then prepare some olive-wood cauteries, both small and large according to the wound and the location where the artery lies, and place the cautery upon that vein where you are holding your finger, and hold it there until the bleeding has stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it bleeds afresh when you lift your finger from the wound, and the cautery has cooled, then quickly take another of the cauteries which are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to apply these one after the other until the bleeding has stopped; and beware of hurting the nerve which lies nearby, and causing any other harm to come upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be well stanched merely by itself when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods which we have described: by cautery, or extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with thread, or by medicine placed on top which has the power to stop bleeding; and let it be bound and pressed firmly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers a tight binding with cloth or placing hot objects on it, or other similar treatments, will not benefit if only a little.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to someone and there is no doctor or medicine available, then he should put his index finger on the wound as we have said, and press hard enough that it is tight on the wound; and he should not move it but moisten it with cold water often so that it is very cold until the blood is congealed and swollen and pressed tight; and he should seek out those who can provide cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of wound treatments
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about all the diseases that require cauterization by fire or hot medicines, and their symptoms, causes, instruments, forms of cauteries; and I included in that chapter from the head to the feet, and I will continue in this chapter following the same path so that one can more easily find what they are looking for.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so that I begin this, my dear son, you must learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and therefore greater caution is needed.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to attempt foolishness.Car li sang est en nos corporeux, et ne puet on que li corps soit en vie, si li sang ne soit en lui: car il li sustent et le meintient.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For there are many types of people who come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	Some have such a hatred for their illness that they would rather die than continue to suffer from it, and the severity of their condition should be a cause for concern.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And there are those who will give you their opinion and say, "Wait, I am healed," but the disease is still present.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	You should not give in to those who come to you with this attitude, but rather prioritize your reputation and well-being over your desires. Make sensible decisions based on what you know to be true, and what you can reasonably predict and observe in the treatment of illnesses that lead to a cure; this will bring glory and honor to your good name.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, may Our Lord give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have arranged this chapter in a conversational manner, according to what is before the chapter on cauteries, which I have discussed for you from the head to the feet, so that you can find more easily whatever you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Do you know that this disease often comes to children when they are born, and when the delivery is too forceful, pressing the child's head; and sometimes it comes from a relaxed cause that one does not know about.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease in anyone except children, and in all those I have seen, death was imminent; and because of this, it seems to me that I should leave the treatment in several parts.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	I saw a child whose head was filled with water, and the head swelled every day until it could no longer be supported; and the moisture accumulated under the bone between the brain and the bone; and the treatment is such that if the moisture is between the brain and the bone, and the abscess is small, you should split the head widely halfway through; and it should be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture runs out; and see the form of the spatulum:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs that you see are the corners of the head opening from each part, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand inside, and it does not close again; then you must split the head into four parts in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	After the incision, remove all moisture with force.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After straining the cuts with bandages and powders, and applying wine and oil, leave it thus for five days; then loosen it, and cure the wound by tenting and poultices, and let the head be extracted equally, and give the patient dry meat to eat, as much as will dry up the moisture in the wound, until the limb is healed and restored.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you observe where the aperture of the abscess is, and the gathering of pus; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore cut where the abscess is open and the gathering of pus, and make an incision according to what you are able; and be careful not to cut into the artery; and let blood flow, so that the patient dies from the flow of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of gout
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When someone has a disease called "cataract" in their eyes or feet, and the disease is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the best treatment is cauterization with which one will cut the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you see them covered, let the patient stretch his neck; then rub the area around the wound with a coarse cloth until the arteries become visible, then extract the patient's neck all around with a bandage; then look where the vein bleeds, and the places of both are behind the ears, and the spots are swollen; then mark the spots in front, then bind one and the other with a sharp spatula from head to toe, so that the incision reaches the bone, and this should be done on both sides.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it, push the spatule under the artery and cut it from above, cutting also as deep as two parts across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, the blood will continue to spurt upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to sensation, then you must measure the amount of space of three digits, then cut from there and gouge up to the bone; and whatever amount of blood is needed should be let out, which is six parts, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the repletion of the artery; then examine the wound: if nothing remains on the bone and there is no sign that an abscess is forming, then drain the wound and ligate it, and dress it with ointment until it heals.
de emigrainne	of emetic
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old-age dementia comes, and the catarrh is acute, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and ancient madness and similar things, and it is treated by various methods of medicine and all that does not help him, then we should extract the arteries in the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extraction is that the patient pulls back the hair from his temples, and feels the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens clearly through its beating, and is not very deep-seated except in some people who are too cold; and if it is deep-seated, the patient should stretch his neck backward with some cloth, then rub the area with some rough cloth, and anoint the area with warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatulum of which there is the shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then draw it up with tweezers, and separate it well from the tissues underneath in each part; and if the artery is thin, then pull it back to the tip of the fingernail, then ligate that part according to the amount of two digits.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, then the sickness will not leave his body at all.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw the blood from 1/4 to 3/4 inch; and if the artery is large, you should tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread so that pus does not come before the healing of the wound, and there is a slow flow of blood; then cut away the excess between the two ties in the same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with an iron cautery to the bone until the head is cut; and this is the best method if the patient does not have a fever and is of a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cauterization helps to finish moisture: that is why it is of great help for moistures.Et si li artere fu grans, si covient que tu traies dou sang des  .xij./ et si li artere ne vout pas estourdir, si le remets en son leu et tue li sans par la pointe d’uncine, car il ne peut bien demorer ains.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.Or there is a better method for extracting arteries that one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method for extracting arteries: one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method: one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method: one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method: one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method: one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method: one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method: one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method: one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method: one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method: one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method: one fills
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too thin, it holds its heat less firmly.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And there should be between the two knives a finger's width of space, and then when you have pricked both sides, you must hold the hot iron against them until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two at both sides, and they should be spaced so that they are not soldered by this cautery all the way through; and this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When tears are flowing from the veins that are on the forehead, and medicine does not help, and you see the face of the sick person turn red, and they feel heat in their forehead and trembling all over their body, and their eyelids are swollen and red, and the skin around their eyes is peeling from the heat of their tears, then this treatment is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	They called this ancient "cure contused", and you should treat the patient with this disease by shaving the hair on his forehead, then making III incisions on his forehead evenly according to the length of his forehead; one incision should be in the middle of his forehead, going down from top to bottom, and the other II at his temples, above his eyebrows. Be careful not to cut the arteries that are at his temples; keep your hand away from the jaw, and each wound should be as wide as III fingers across, joining together in the middle. Have a piece of sponge and a cloth ready to wipe away the blood, then insert the spatulum evenly from both sides where the incisions are.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision which is to be made at the temple all the way to the second incision; and scrape all of the skin that is between the two incisions up to the skin that is on the bone, then make another incision from the middle incision all the way to the other second one, and then remove this spatulum.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Then insert into the first incision the instrument that is called  "cultellary", and it is very sharp on one side, and not at all sharp on the other, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And cut the coat according to the shape of the chest, and the lower part towards the bone, and bring it together until it reaches the middle slit.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And tie all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous to the opening in the chest, and then make another incision in the middle slit up to the other defiant; then draw out the blood evenly, and express the site of the blood drawn; then put a tent made of old cotton in each slit, and place wet clothes soaked in wine and oil and garlic on top, and be careful that no pus comes near it; and after three days loosen the ligature, and administer a large amount of cold water, then treat the wound with basilicon ointment mixed with rosemary oil, and other remedies used to treat wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	from the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When someone experiences acute catarrh regularly, and you see their eyes are sunken and small, and their vision weakened, and the eyelids burned, and hair falling out, and pain in the head, and they sneeze; then know from these symptoms that this matter and these catarrhs come from many veins, and the medicine for it is what I have described.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you must instruct the patient to look straight ahead, then make a large slit in the forehead, and another one from the corner of the eye.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begin the incision from the left temple to the right, and cut down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the temples' nerves that control chewing; and once the bone is exposed, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, and then insert old cotton between the two lips of the slit and pack it with linen bandages; then apply dampened cloths in wine and oil, and beware of hot abscesses; when it is removed, you must rub the bone until it starts to grow again, then treat it with healing substances that promote growth.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this way: take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of colocynthis, and make an ointment from them; then administer it to these wounds to promote healing throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the treatment of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of four things: grains, or a stone, or something similar like iron; or seeds, such as peas, beans; or something flowing, like water and garlic and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it falls into the ear, whether a pebble or something else that does not adhere to the ear nor grow in it, one must hold the ear towards the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see a stone, pour a little violet oil or oil of tansy, then proceed to extract it; and let the patient sneeze from snuff, and plug their nostrils when sneezing comes on, and place pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and hold the ear upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	It often comes out through this treatment; and if it does not come out, then proceed to extract it with fine forceps, according to its shape:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out through the pincers, that is good; if not, then administer extraction with a slender needle of small tubing; and if it does not come out in this way, make an iron hook and push the hook's tip into the ear canal firmly, and plug around the hook with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the hook; then pull it out forcefully, for often it will come out as we have said; and if it does not come out in such a manner, take bird glue, and put some on a tool designed for this purpose, and place a bit of cotton around it; then press the glue onto the pebble or whatever it is, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not come out from all these things that we have said, then you must hurry to split the ear so that pus comes out, and a spasm; and the manner of splitting is that you first make the patient's head bleed, and draw blood according to its strength, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear upwards, and make a small split in the root of the ear at the fat where it depends; and the split should be like a crescent moon, so that you can reach the pebble, then extract it according to your ability, and suck on it vigorously with your mouth; and treat it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grains which are there and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer .i. spatulum with a thin needle according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision on that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think the grains are moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract them with fine forceps and with a suction cup, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the water that drains from the ear, the patient should first sneeze with snuff, and plug the ear with cotton wool.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	Let him lie on the same side as the ear ache is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	if it jumps out by itself, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	if not, take many small stones according to the length of your index finger and heat them gently in the fire; then place one of these heated stones into the ear of the sufferer, and press down on it with another stone from above, and insert a third stone into the ear from below; and keep placing heated stones over the affected area until all the ache has subsided, and thus will all the pain subside; and if you see fit, take a straw, and place one end in the ear, and heat the other end in the fire until the most painful part is scorched; then repeat this process with other straws until all the pain goes away, as we have said for the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the worm, if it is small like a flea or similar thing, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is large enough to be felt, administer extraction with tweezers; and this is the easiest way to remove what is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the cure does not help, then you must look at the ear in the sun; if there appear no worms, then pull them out with subtle pincers, and if they don't appear, then take the skin where the form is.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it is narrow below and broad above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Then insert the thinnest end of the probe into the ear according to the amount of pain the patient is experiencing, then draw it out slowly and repeatedly until all the wax comes out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not come out, then plug the outer ear with cotton as I said in the case of a stone; and if they still do not emerge as we have said, then administer distillation remedies that the ancients have experimented with for worm removal, and you will find these remedies in the section on distillation treatments; and so distill your oils and medicines into the ear using any of these instruments, depending on which shape you observe:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it should be made of silver or brass with small holes below and openings above for distillation; and to press the distillation into the instrument, use a brass instrument specially made for this purpose, and if you wish, take a razor and wrap cotton around the tip; then pour your oil or juice, and what you want from your medicines, into the skin, and let the skin be in the ear; then insert the razor all the way into the cotton, and press your hand gently so that the oil is distilled into the ear; and the patient feels the medicine inside, and let the distillation be a little warm as it is distilled into the ear; and be careful that it is not too cold, because the medicine will not be as effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the treatment of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without a hole in their ear; and the same thing happens to adults due to an abscess or wound inside the ear, and sometimes this abscess erupts in the ear, which cannot be seen; and sometimes there is only a small opening, which can be seen clearly.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	When it erupts and cannot be seen, it indicates a poor prognosis in many cases, and in such cases, one should hold the affected ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the membrane exposed, then it has reached this stage due to the following reasons:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And if it is sharp and pointed in front and behind, without piercing the ear; if the membrane is due to an abscess or the body of the ear, then hold it with tweezers and gently peel it off until all the pus is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the obstructions are deep in the ear, then take a thin, light scalpel and heat it gently in the fire, then place it on the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the patient's eardrum vibrate with the sound, pierce gently, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then insert a plug into the ear according to the size of the opening, and lubricate it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this every day until the wound is healed, then take a tent and moisten it in rosewater, and sprinkle powdered vitriolic stone on it; and if you see swelling in the ear, it is necessary to withdraw the tent and move another tent moistened with cerotum made from rosemary oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then treat it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if there is bleeding, take a sponge and cloth dipped in cold water and apply it to the ear, and use other remedies that stop the bleeding that are used for distilling.
de la char des papieres	of paper charcoal
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This ointment comes in papers when they are moist and dry; you should therefore extend them with tweezers and pincers, and the root of a spatula; then place powdered vitriol on the site.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they are not removed by scraping, then cauterize them with a delicate lens-shaped cautery tool, and the cautery after the incision is beneficial; they often reappear when something remains in their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of hail
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times they come with paper-thin things that look like gravel in appearance and hardness, and this is why this disease is called "hail," and it is a collection of thick moisture on top and bottom; the treatment is as follows: examine if the hailstone moves from one side to another, and it is an easy matter to know; then cut it open from the side, then carefully peel off the outer layer from each part, then pick it up with tweezers, and scoop it out.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	if you cannot scoop it out without piercing the eardrum, do not harm the patient; and if the fissure is large, stitch it up, and treat it until it heals; and if it is small, do not use force, as the ointment will restore it right away and heal the wound.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hematoma is descending within the ear towards the upper part, reverse the paper, and press it with pincers; and if the paper is separated by the incision, it does not matter; and when the hematoma is pressed, wash the eye with salty water, and cure the place of that which causes infection until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that is woven into the papers above, and this happens more to children than to adults, and severely to themselves, and they get the catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears hasten to them; and because of this they lie on their faces, and sleep on them, and their papers are underneath their eyelids, moistened by the inflammation and appearance covered by the exinach that appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the eye with your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of the operation is that the patient puts his head on yours; and then take .i. linen cloth, and make a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that exnac contains in each part, and then put it on him; and press with your fingers on both sides so that the exnac is brought together within the circle; then make an incision in the middle of the moisture with a spatulum, making it no larger than the wound made for bleeding; and in various dispositions, exnac comes out of the incision according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Take therefore a piece of cloth and hold it between your fingers and thumb, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out; and be careful not to push into the fissure so that you do not go all the way to the sphincter muscle up to the eye and injure it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the external orifice opens at the beginning of the fissure, gently dilate the opening slightly so that it appears; then extract it as we have said, then moisten the cloth in vinegar and water, place it on the area, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who grind sesame seeds and place them on top to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the eye until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is a hot abscess in the eye, treat it with soothing poultices until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	And if a cold abscess comes to the area, apply a hot poultice until it is warm; then apply warm oil, and treat it with bandages.
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow from papers that are different from nature, and they are enveillit, they harm themselves and cause various diseases, such as tears, softening of the papers, and albugine, leading to the destruction of the eyes; and there are four ways to treat this: either by cauterization with fire, or by using a medicine applied directly to the eye, or through incision and suturing, or via canes, depending on what I will describe.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You should place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the affected eye paper towards your left hand; if it is cured, that is good; otherwise, insert a needle with thread through the edge of the paper where the hair is growing, and pierce 1 thread through the upper part of the paper all the way to the edge, then turn the paper over and make an incision in the part under the paper, under the abnormal hairs, up to the sphenoid bone, following the path of the tear duct from the large lachrymal gland to the small one; then remove the thread and place a small tent made of cotton and linen underneath the paper, then draw a figure of eight on the paper, like a myrtle leaf, but the shape should depend on how much you see the divided paper rising.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if for someone who needs it, put a great quantity of paper according to how soft the paper is; then make the entire bandage along the two lines that you have marked, and start from the large wound up to the small; and let one of the slits be close to the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the needle into one of the two corners of the heart, then scrape it all; then bring the two lips together with a stitch using a fine woolen thread and an awl, and remove any blood, and dry up the excess thread on the two edges with any sticky substance if you see fit to do so; and if not, don't worry about it, then leave the stitch and the threads for three or four days; then treat the wound without stitches using drying and constricting substances, because the paper lifts up at the wound's soudure [sealing] and its binding together, but the stitch is painful (as the ancients say), and this is a job without fear; and there is another way: it is that you mark the paper with a figure that is just like the leaf of a myrtle, as we have described, with three fingers separated according to the shape that is shown here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut out what is above with small scissors evenly according to the shape which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	If you cannot hold the tongs, and the object is not aligned, then take a needle and thread, and pierce it through the center of the wound; and take another thread and pass it through the large lip, and the second thread through the small one, and bring the threads together equally between your fingers; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin above which you have marked, as we have described; then bring the two lips of the wound together by sewing, and heal it until it is cured; and if an abscess forms at your incision, then calm it with cerulean and similar soothing ointments; and sometimes the hairs of the paper are converted: so you should use what we have said about the incision; but the sewing in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of warts is as follows: convert the parchment and insert it according to what I have said, then make two warts by skill, and two fine threads as long as the width of the sputum and the broad part; then tie two threads at both ends where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other skillfully above what is on top of the parchment of the eye, and strain the two warts from the two formed parts; and leave it thus for several days, and the skin that is strained will die and shrivel up and fall off when it dries.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is delayed, and the wound has strength, then heal it until it is cured; and when the wound is sewed up, and if the paper is lifted, and the hairs no longer hurt; and this is the form of the two channels that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	the work is such that you prick with a fine needle, and thread it with a fine and soft silk thread; then assemble the threads and tie them skillfully, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then prepare in the case a fine silk thread, and tie the ends of the thread; then put the patient's head into your hand; and let it be in the sun so that the work is declared, for it is a subtle and minute work, then pierce the needle all the way through the parchment to the root of the hair, and draw it out through the parchment until it comes out with the natural hair; then thread the hair into the case, if there are one or two or three or more hairs; then withdraw your hand so that the hairs come out through the case with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the wound is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then treat the wound underneath all the way to the root that you have assigned to it, until the wound comes out from above the opening and you see it through the eye; then treat the wound and the thread, and close the eye and let it be closed for 1 or 2 days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh grows over it; and if the hair is short, then accompany one long hair of the horse's tail, and let it grow with that one you leave it, until it is elongated and then release it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the eye's pus
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, which is called "alacratia" or warts, comes into the eye, there are two ways in which it occurs: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or cutting or cauterization, and by similar means.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the manner of treating it is to split the growth, and loosen its lips, and place within it tents of linen, and keep it clean; and one must not use in its treatment anything that dries and constricts.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do that, the disease will return worse than before; but one should work with softening things, such as fenugreek; and rosewater or alder water, and linseed are cooked, and diaquilon ointment melted in some of the oils, and enveloped in a tent, and cured in this way.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure are that you must take care that it does not heal according to its former shape; and these works which we have said are not remedies for this disease, but preventions so that it does not return to its former shape.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease, which is beneath what is truly called "the brain", is both natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Accidents come from wounds and cuts and cautery and similar things; the way to treat them is for you to take a needle with a double thread, and pierce it into the flesh, and pass it through from one earlobe to the other, so that the thread runs through both ears; then the flesh above is closed up all around the needle, and the wound is wide open.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the wound returns as it should be, that is good; if not, then take a razor and insert it into the wound, and turn the wound inside out, and make two cuts along the sides within the wound; and let the edges of the two cuts be at the two corners of the incision you made, forming angles so that when they are stitched together, the shape is like that of the letter "Y" in the German alphabet; then remove this flesh, according to how much is hanging down below, from what follows the wound, then bring the two torn parts together and sew them with a thread of wool; then treat it as we said before with softening medicines and bandages, until it heals.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	If the disease comes from a split or a stitch or cautery, then one should make a plain slit underneath the hair of the scalp, and according to what is mentioned above; then unsheathe between the two lips of the tent, as I have said; and one must perform the operation according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters prepare remedies with all their might, so that they may bring the figure back to its natural shape; and the patients themselves, according to what is needed in terms of treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	suddenly from the scalp
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suddenness happens to the scalp in such a way that the scalp above is separated from the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then one should insert the tip of a razor underneath the scalp, and lift it upward; and press it with tweezers, until you grab what is cut into the spatulum, which is neither too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient cannot bear the pain of the too-sharp spatulum cutting into the eye; and your incision, by which you peel back this membrane, should be light, so that the scalp returns to its natural shape; and all of this assembly is healed, and they sometimes produce a saline solution in the eye, and raise it with sweet water, and use a bandage; then place a tent made of linen between the scalp and the eye, and place soft wool soaked in egg yolk on top of the eye; and after the third day, use the ointment and soothing remedies until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the eyelid
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the nail is in two ways: it is nervous and resembles a hard cyst, and another which is not nervous but resembles white congealed moisture; when touched by iron and pinched with tweezers, neither can be removed. Both appearances begin at the large tear duct, growing little by little until they cover the entire eye and its sight and movement.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of incision is that the patient tilts his head toward you, then he opens his eyes; and hold the paper in your hand, then grab the nail with tweezers and pull it up slightly; then take a needle and thread through a horse, cow or ox hair, and double the end of the needle over, then pierce the nail with the entire needle, and tie the nail with a string and tie it above, then scrape all along the side of the nail where the tear duct is, up to the eyebrow, leaving the natural skin around the tear duct, so that by the incision the tears do not come out as usual; sometimes the nail is just stuck on the needle and thread, as we have said; then scrape it off all along the tear duct gently and with small movements.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful that the tear duct does not touch the thread and break it, and that the eyelid is not pierced; after the incision, put a little powdered chalk in the eye, and make a collar of litargir, and leave it until the next day; then treat it as needed until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nerved and you cannot push in the needle and the hook cannot enter, this kind of nail is often cured by medicines; they grow as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, then work the eye of the disease, and take the spatulum gently punctured according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And draw the nail gently, and if you see that it is not lessened and the reason approaches, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litarge and red copper and powdered chalk, and stop the eye until the next day; then begin the other work according to this same action, until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then begin the work again as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the eyelid hurts the eye greatly, then suspend it on the hook, and cut off a part but not all so that the body of tears does not come in; then distill into the eye red collar made from litarge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh which grows on the eyeball
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	In some men, a red pustule sometimes emerges from the eye, covering the eyelid and pressing against the eyeball; it resembles a rose on a column. The patient should first place his head down, then open his eye, and press the pustule gently with his fingernail until all the pus is expressed; he should then hold it firmly in place. Next, cut the pustule's top and carefully scrape away all the pus, being careful not to injure the eyeball during this process. Make an incision as described earlier for the nail, using a small blade to remove any remaining matter; follow the instructions in this chapter for such incisions. Once the incision is complete and all the pus expressed, apply the yolk of a hard-boiled egg or red vitriol and similar corrosive medicines to the eye; place cotton soaked in egg white over the eye to protect it from heat. If anything remains, and the heat persists, and you suspect a hot abscess, leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with cooling remedies. Then return to treating the eye until it is healed, and repeat this process for any other pustules that form in the eye in this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, you should also know how to treat weak eyes by the natural way, and with surgery for accidental injuries; and do not insert your fingers in any of these procedures until you see that this member is suffering from that procedure.
des voines des eulz	of veins of them
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Veins are red lines that cover the eye, they hinder vision and weaken the eye every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is therefore necessary that you first examine the eye to see if there are any other diseases besides the veiny appearance; then proceed in this manner: instruct the patient to tilt their head back, then gently squeeze the veins all around the socket according to your expertise, making the incisions on the eyelid thin and double according to this shape.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let two edges be gradual in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then treat the veins firmly, and draw out the blood drop by drop after another, until you see the veins removed from the eye; and be careful not to bruise the eye with the points of the spatulas, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not touch the veins; and when you have done this, distill into the eye a green and red collyrium to corrupt what remains of the vein.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you do not have the power to pull out all of them in that hour, then make a plaster over the eye with things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for several days until the pain is eased and there is assurance of a hot abscess, then begin again according to this method which is before until it is healed; and this is the form of strength:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the eye fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The doctor should also examine the 'arissati' fistula: when you cure it with cautery and medicine that burns according to what I have said before, if it is not healed, then there must be a cut made over the abscess where it should remain, and all the moisture within must be drawn out until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and blackness, then it is necessary to use this instrument; and it is called an 'aspre chief', and it must be made from a very hard substance, with one end pointed like a file as shown in the present figure.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the site of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers and press your hand a little while until you know that the corruption has been removed; do this several times, then restore the site with drying medications.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the eyelids are glued together and no pus comes out, and the flesh of the eyelid is glued and remains that way for 40 days without any improvement or abscess forming, and no evil occurs, then you may be sure it is healed; but if not, there is another method to open the fistula at the edge of the eye socket according to this form: and it is necessary to expose the bone a second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it is exposed, take out the forest according to this shape, and let the head of the tool be three-pronged, and the shaft be tapered to a point as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then he places it on the bone there, and moves his hand away from the eye a little, then returns to press down hard with the drill until it penetrates the bone, and the patient feels it through the windpipe if he keeps his hand over his nose; then he applies dry medicine as I taught you, and when the flesh has grown and hardened, he examines the matter in the nose; this is lighter for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the output of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are fully open all around and do not disturb the nose or cause thinning, then you should ligate the patient; then cleanse the eye, then place leeches or suckers without piercing to draw out fluid; then apply a poultice made from acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla onto the eye; then tightly bind the eye with bandages and linen; the method for the linen is that you take quite soft linen, double each piece in four, then place one on top of the other according to how much the eye needs; then tightly bind it from above with a sturdy bandage, and repeat the leeches without piercing to draw out fluid; then remove the leeches and leave the eye bound day and night, and if the ligature becomes loose, you should re-bind it tightly; then remove the ligature after one day and one night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good; if not, then repeat the poultice, bandages, ligature, and leeches until it heals.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	from the rupture of a woven fabric
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a tear occurs in woven fabric, it opens and reveals something like a grain of resin, which is frightening to see; therefore, if you see it covering, the work is such that you thread a needle into the root of the lower part up to the upper part, then thread another needle with a double thread through the part of the tear; and pierce it, and leave the first needle according to its position; then cover the area of the double thread and tie one part of the fabric tightly, then pull out the needle and place wet woolen cloth on the eye; and leave it until the threads tear with the fabric, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound heals; and sometimes the wound is constrained by the fabric on each side in a circle of cloth, until it heals.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes give great appearance, then pierce them with a thin spatulum which comes from the bottom of the eye, and scrape away the white moisture and bring the eyes down, and enter in immediately; then extract it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the corner of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called "alcunnati" is nothing but an abscess in the eye, resembling a descending inflammation, but it is not water; and the way to examine it is to make the patient sit upright on a chair, then take his head in your hands and move it until you see the abscess appear above your eyes; then let it be pierced, and the light blocked, and the patient should see things as he used to; and if it does not descend below, know that it is an abscess, and if the discharge from the abscess is not clear as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	if you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the spatulum and insert it under the horny membrane at the point where the conjunctiva continues with the horny membrane and the cornea, until the bowstring is loosed; and when it is drawn out, distill into the eye honey mixed with hot water or water in which fenugreek has been boiled and honey.
des aigues de l’oil	of the eye waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have discussed the appearances of diseases in the division, and what should be done to pierce them; now act according to the health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	You should make the patient sit between your crossed hands away from sunlight, and press his healthy eye firmly shut; then hold the paper over his eye with your left hand if it is his left eye, or your right hand if it is his right; then take in your right hand, if it is his left eye, the instrument called «almagda», or in your left hand if it is his right; then place the point of the instrument alongside the cornea through the thickness of a hair at the outer edge of the iris to the part where the tear duct emerges, and push the instrument called «almagda» gently but firmly, and turn your hand so that it pierces the cornea, and you will feel that almagda reaches the empty space; and the depth of the path of almagda should be equal to the thickness of a hair from the edge of the pupil to the end of the iris; this is the cornea of the eye; then you will see the bone in the paper through the transparency of the horny membrane, and then push the instrument up into the space below one vein after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	if he sees the water now, let the patient see it before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After rest a little, and if the water rises again by the second way, put it down with the instrument; and when it is stuck in and does not rise, then gently draw out the almagda while turning your hand a little; and then put in the eye some little of the gem-water, and take away the instrument.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put by force into the eye cotton wool or linen moistened in rose oil and an abundance of egg white, and bind it with clean cloth.Si li aigue ne vout point remonier, si leve la fuer de dedans la vierne et de l’oil avec un picquet de fer ou d’oile de paume et legierement avec un puitier de fer; puis li lie avec l’oil sain.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	If the water does not want to rise again, then lift the force from within the vein and eye with an iron rod or palm oil and gently with an iron spoon; then bind it with clean cloth. We, and those who are of our time, put on ground cumin mixed with an abundance of egg white.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if  'almagda' cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some people whose eyes are too hard, then you should take the instrument called  'alberit', which has this shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And thus pierce the conjunctive only, and do not go too deep, but make the incision subtle, then plug it with alum, as we have said; and when the work is complete, prepare the patient for sleep, causing him to lie on his back in a dark place; and he should be free of all movements, and take light food, and not move his head or to the right or left, and he should be bound according to his condition for three days; then release him in that same dark house, and test his sight, and show him some things, and then remove the bandage by the seventh day; and you should not do this during the hour of the operation or after the incision now, but you should alleviate it, so that the water rises gently.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	And if there are abscesses in both eyes, you should release the bandage before the seventh day, and use the remedy for abscesses; and when it is healed, remove the sight-covering and put an eye-patch over one eye to cover it, and he should remain in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then leave the house a little at a time, and return to your bed; and know that no disciple should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from Iraq, who told us that in his country they pierce and put almond milk into it, so that water is drawn out, but nevertheless I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read about it in books of the ancients; and perhaps this is a new thing.Et s’il vient a l’oil que le tenebros ne peut estre remedeiz par nullis de cestz chapitrez, que tu deslie la veue et la metes en son leu, car il ne se pourait mie remedeer.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the shapes of almagest , because those who do not know them will see them; and they are properly of iron:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And the heads of the needles have this same subtlety, and the hindmost are pointed in three angles.
de la char sor le neis	of the heart through the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes there are born or born children with various deformities, and some look like scorpions with many feet; and others have an encrusted discoloration of the skin, and others have a discolored discoloration.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	For those with the discoloration that is not encrusted, you should make the patient sit in your hands facing the sun; open their nostrils and pour the oil onto those spots, and pull them out hard; then use as much as you can bear of the subtle spear point, until you know that the discoloration is all gone.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains any thing which we cannot cover, then open it at all .i. of the subtle instruments slightly, so that nothing remains; and if without you are overwhelmed, or abscess bad, then dry it as it should be; and if it is malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize it until the blood is stained and all the flesh is removed, then pour or neat's milk and water or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the nostrils open and moisture comes to the palate, you know it is healthy; and if moisture does not pass through as it should, you know there is a discoloration in the bone that blocks the instrument from cutting: therefore you must insert a thick linen thread through one nostril, and tie a knot with clean hands, and have between each knot as much space as a finger or less; then put the patient's head to the thread in their hand at their best strength, and pull it through the odorant until it comes out of the nose through the mouth; and many times children do this at school, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it; then hold the head that comes out of the nose in one hand, and the other head that comes out of the mouth in the other hand, and pull them apart gently while holding the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this until you know that the teeth have corrupted the meat, then draw out the thread, wipe off the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that is left of the meat; and then put a plug of plaster in the nose for some days until it heals, and if it needs dry medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, through which one distills oils and medicines into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be made of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and it should have a handle to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid. And if you wish, make a closed cane, and let the instrument be hollow to clean out the ear; and have a plug in the ear to hold it while heating the oil or other liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the heart through the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "telul" arises at the tip of the nose; it grows and becomes large until it is visible to the eye. Therefore, you should cut it at the beginning and remove all the pus; then apply fire cautery or burning medicine. If you delay cutting it until it becomes large, take care that it is not hard, of dark color, or insensate: do not touch it with iron, for this is a deep abscess. For when it is cut once, great harm comes to the patient. If the abscess is due to touch and not to dark color, and you see that it can be entirely covered, then empty the wound and cut it without fear, cleansing the area of dry and constricting substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when a solution of continuation comes in one of these upper cartilage, it benefits little, unless in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, when this happens to someone, look to see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then attach the two lips with a stitch, and cure it until it heals; and if the lips are torn on both sides, then you should scrape all the parts of their core until they heal, then sew up the two lips, and tie them, and powder dragon's blood and incense ground; and place a piece of strong plaster or other healing plaster over the powders, and leave it to heal by itself, then cure with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of sewing is that you prepare the thread: either with needles, as we have said in sewing the belly; or with a thread, as I have already informed you.
des apostemes des levres	of lip abscesses
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At home, there are hard abscesses inside the lips, resembling grains of wheat, smaller and larger; therefore, you must twist the lips, and slit them at each end, then grab them with tweezers and cut into each part; then apply vitriated quicklime to the incision until the blood is stanched; and then leave it with garlic, and treat the area with dry substances until it heals.
de la char des gencives	of gum swelling
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times a growth arises on the gums, which the ancients call "albus"; you should hold it with tweezers, and cut at its root, and let the blood or pus run out; then apply powdered vitriol, or other restraining and drying powders, over the site. If the growth returns after the incision, and this often happens, cut it again, and cauterize it; if it does not return after the cautery, that is how you treat an abscess.
des sordens	from filth
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes there are growths at the base of the teeth, in the mouth between the gums, which are unsightly and rough; and sometimes the teeth are black, yellow, or green, due to corruption in the gums, and they smell bad; you should make the patient hold his jaw open and expose the teeth or gums, removing everything until it is clean; and thus you should treat blackness, yellowness, greenness, and other discoloration, until they are cleaned. If what was removed at first returns, it is good; if not, then do it again the next day and the day after, until everything is removed. Know that teeth require various types of instruments for cleaning, depending on what the job shows you, so that the instruments used to clean between the teeth have different forms from those used to clean the gums; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat a toothache that you delay pulling the tooth only as long as you can, because it should not be done; for it is a very serious matter to pull a tooth without cause.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore, when the patient is forced to pull, you must be certain of the tooth socket.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the pain deceives the patient and he believes it to be in the healthy tooth socket; and he pulls out a good tooth and, despite this, the pain does not cease because the evil tooth socket remains, for we have already attempted this with these patients. And when you are certain of the tooth socket, you must then scrape around the tooth all the way to the gum; then move it with your fingers or with fine tweezers a little bit at a time until it is well loosened; then hold it firmly in the tweezers. Let the patient's head be between your knees and held steady so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	Then pull out the tooth carefully without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of those instruments and insert it into each side gently, and move it as you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and eaten away, then you must fill it with lint, where the holes are; and gently clamp it with tweezers so that it does not break while being clamped; and one must work very gently around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be careful that you do not break it, and leave a part of it behind, and cause greater pain to the patient through the maliciousness of the root.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And beware of doing as unskilled surgeons do, who in their haste and audacity sometimes break the tooth, and do not listen to what we have told them; but sometimes they bring on great illness through the roots that remain, or by breaking the tooth, as we have often seen. And when the tooth is pulled, wash the socket with wine or garlic and vinegar; and if there is bleeding, which often happens, apply crushed vitriol to the site; and if this does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the instruments, which make the teeth loose first, should have long points and thick handles so that they do not bend when you pull out the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be made of thick metal so that they do not bend when pulling, and they should be well-made iron, and they should be toothed to grip the roots.
de la racine des dens	of the tooth roots
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains in place, you should apply wet cotton wrapped in butter for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 until the area is soft. Then insert the forceps called "algefri," which make the shoulder look like a sick bird's beak; and inside, they are shaped like a file, and that is their form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tweezers, you must uncover the skin all around the root, and insert the instrument called "althali", that is, a spatula, whose shape is as follows:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	Let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out through it, that is good; if not, use all the instruments, whose shapes come later:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And one can also use this instrument with .ij. fingers, whose shape is as follows:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools which are in front of the reason for the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large tweezers, whose shape is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	Let this instrument be so strong that it cannot break, and know that there are many dental instruments; and also other instruments which are not counted; and the wise, subtle master finds his own instrument according to what his work and the illness show him, for there are many illnesses where the ancients did not teach an instrument because of the variety of causes. And if it does not break in the bone or in any of the other bones, but protrudes, then he searches for the instruments that he needs, which I have told you about, and helps with gestures, by which these are the forms:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be thick and well-fitting to hold the bone, so that it does not slip but can be held and removed; and then restore the place with suitable medicines. And if there is a protuberance in the bone, and it is small, then treat it with this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When a tooth appears not according to nature, and the shape is ugly, especially in young women, you should know whether the tooth is new after the tooth, and is not in its proper place, and cannot be filed or ground down. Then pull it out; and if there is an air pocket with the tooth, take this instrument whose shape is like a small beak, and let it be made of iron with a pointed end:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And tap it gently day by day because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others. And if it is apparent that it can be ground down, then grind it with a file like this, in the shape shown:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is like the lime that needles are made from; and with lime gently prick the tooth little by little day after day, so that it does not move until it falls out; then smooth it completely at the end with a file, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, file down the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth is loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth is loose, whether from blowing or hitting, and the patient cannot chew without defecating, and you have tried to treat it with constricting medicines but it does not work; then you must restrain them with a gold wire because silver wire turns green and rots, but gold never moves. The wire should be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the amount of space between the teeth. If you see the teeth are moving, take the wire and wrap it twice around the two healthy teeth, then place the loose tooth between the teeth, whether there is one or more, until blood comes from the healthy tooth on the other side. Then begin covering again up to the point where you started, and gently pull your hand while it is bleeding, so that it does not move. The ligature should be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then cover the head of the tooth with floss and grip it with tweezers, and bring them together, and hold them between the healthy teeth, and place it so that it does not bite the tongue; then leave it tight as long as it can stay, and if it comes undone, or the floss breaks, then hold it with another piece of floss; let it remain and serve in this way for all time, and this is the shape of the teeth and the arrangement of both healthy and diseased teeth, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when a tooth falls out, if one is put in its place, fresh after fresh, as we have said; and no one who is not wise and experienced should attempt this, and sometimes the shape of a tooth is made from a cow's bone, and it is put in the place where there is a defect, and it is restrained as we have said, and it stays and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	cut off the hair of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Sometimes this ligament which comes under the tongue is born like that; or it can be caused by an accident or wound; and the treatment is to open the mouth of the patient, and press his head against your healthy one, and hold his tongue; then grasp the thick nervous ligament with tweezers, as wide as the tongue is dislocated from its socket, and if there is hardness or swelling, it is due to a sudden wound, so it should be pricked with an awl and grasped with the tweezers; take care that the incision is not too deep, because of the artery underneath; when you have finished, lift the patient's head with rosewater and vinegar, or cold water, then place a tent made of linen under the tongue; and tie the patient's tongue every night so that it cannot heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if bleeding occurs, apply ground vitriol to the area; and if the blood clotted, cauterize with a lentigo cautery, which is good for this. Then treat it further until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it is black or hard and the patient doesn't feel any pain, then don't touch it, as it is likely a cancerous growth. If it is declining towards a blister and there is moisture, pierce it with a needle and release the fluid with a gentle spatulum, opening it from both sides. If bleeding occurs due to your intervention, apply crushed vitriol until it stops, then return to your treatment until all the pus is drained. Raise the affected area with poultices of garlic and salt, and treat the wound with other remedies until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	from abscesses in the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes there are sores in the throat called "godath," and they are properly called almonds, and when you treat them as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then take care: if they are hard abscesses of a small size and a light color, do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also to prevent bleeding; but let it be until it is mature, and then you will burst it, or it will break by itself; and if it is of a white color and the root is thin, have an instrument ready to cover it, but first look to see if the abscess is calm and pacified.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then have the patient sit facing the sun, with his chin in your hand and his mouth open, and the surgeon holds the instrument between his hands, and presses the tongue down below all the apparatus, from which comes its shape; it should be made of fine silver or brass, as thin as a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Then press the tongue down with the instrument and you will see the abscess. Take a pair of tweezers and grab it, pulling it out of the tonsil and up towards the surface as far as possible; pull some threads from the cloth along with it, then cover the instrument again, which should be shaped like a hook, to create a grip, and is made of either iron or copper.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	If you do not have this instrument available, use tweezers, which should be shaped like a hook:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And it has a sharp point on one end and a flat edge on the other; and when you have cut one of the tonsils, cut the other in the same way, and after the incision gargle the patient with warm water, and with water and garlic, and if there is bleeding, gargle the patient with water, or with peels of pomegranates that have been cooked, or with myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then cure it until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses besides the two tonsils appear in the throat, so cut them thus as the two tonsils are cut.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was deep in her throat; it was specifically a small, sensitive abscess. Her entire throat was swollen, so the woman couldn't breathe through the opening, which was blocked, nor eat or drink, and she would have died within one to two days had this continued.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess had become so swollen that it had pushed up two warts from the back of her throat.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I quickly went to work and inserted the probe into one of the openings in her nose, then pulled it taut, and cut out a large chunk of the abscess; I then repeated this process on the other nostril, and opened up her mouth, pressing down on her tongue. Next, I inserted the probe into the abscess, removing another portion, but only a little blood came out; this cleared the airway in her throat, and she could now drink water and wine, and we continued to cut away at the abscess for an extended period of time. The abscess would shrink, then grow again, filling up the space I had emptied, so I packed it with a poultice, and cauterized it from within the throat; this stopped its growth. I left those parts, and God did the rest after me.
de l’uve	of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the iris descends to the eyeball, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is thick and round beneath, it is called an "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it has been cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the pus is abated, and it is thin; and it is round and not long; and it is blood-red or a fuschia color or black, then you should avoid incision on it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have described, of its whiteness and length, you should cause the patient to sit facing the sun, and press his tongue against the instrument of which we have made mention earlier; then insert the hook into the eye, and draw it beneath, and scrape with one of the two instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the two almond-shaped areas.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you must not cover anything more than the excess that is beyond the natural term; for if you cover more, it hurts the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said about the incision of the two testicles, and cure it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of covering, then you should use an incision to treat his fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the method of cautery is for acute fever.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient should put his head on your lap, and then press his tongue against the instrument that we described in the chapter on cautery, and mix it with hot water, so that it is neither too thick nor too clear; and use the application of this instrument, which has this shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it has a handle on its head where the medicine is placed, like the handle of a spoon, and you place the instrument with all the medicine on the pupil; and the patient lies on his side, so that the saliva and mucus from the medicine run out of his mouth and do not go down into his throat and lungs. Then hold your hand over the medicine and press it onto the pupil for the duration of half an hour, until you see it become numb and the bites of the medicine are pacified. And if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into the cotton on top, so that the cotton sticks to the pupil; and do this often, until the cautery is complete, then let it dry, and remove it after four or five days. And if you need to renew the cautery with medicine, then renew it, and after the cautery, wash around the pupil with cotton dipped in butter, and cleanse what is around the medicine; and use a cold compress, and treat it with gargles until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision or cautery. If it is cured by fumigation according to this method, take calamin, hyssop, oregano, rue, chamomile, wormwood, and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in one pot, and add garlic, and let it boil; and the pot should be well glazed with strong earth, and in the pot there is one instrument with a handle shaped thus:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be made of silver or bronze, and one of the ends should be placed in the patient's mouth so that the vapors rise into the eye through the canal until the eye is deadened; then repeat this often, until the eye dries out, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of a hot abscess, because many things can happen there; nor do this after the hot abscess has broken.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	If this instrument is not available, take a stick and place an egg white on the tip so that the patient's mouth is not too hot; because the egg white will not allow the vapors to trouble the mouth, and it is a good remedy together with salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times a bone or fish spine, or some object, gets stuck in the throat; so you must try to remove what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with the whole instrument, so that you can move the object; and if it does not come out and is lodged in the throat, you should make the patient vomit until the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps the object will come out through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a dry piece of bread; and tie a thread to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it reaches the spot, it will lodge there, and then you can pull it out; and if it does not come out in the way we have described, take an instrument of lead according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and let the head be raised upward; and beware of touching the epiglottis, lest it be torn, nor push the bone in; and move the patient's head so that he vomits, in order to dislodge the object; then he swallows the instrument, so that he can dislodge the object; if he cannot swallow it, then pull it out with the whole instrument, equally, until it is out.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the saliva of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Sometimes the remedy is to bleed the patient, as I have said in the section on remedies; and if this does not help, then examine the throat of the ill person towards the sun, and then press their tongue with the instrument I have described to you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the blood, draw it out with a small hook, or with fine tweezers suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, take a pointed stick, and insert it into the throat of the ill person; then heat the tip of the stick with hot iron, and do this frequently.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient has a fever all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	And then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it in without swallowing, moving it around with his hand frequently; and as soon as he feels the water, he will spit it out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not work as we have said, then suffocate the patient with assafetida smoke, using the instrument I described for smoking out the uvula; do this several times, because it will work without bleeding.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the method of the smoking is that you put hot charcoal in a pot, and cover it with a perforated lid, and in the hole put the end of the instrument; then pour your smoke into it, and the patient puts his head back in his mouth, closing his mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but goes to the uvula; and the uvula will come out now, and if it does not, repeat the smoking several times; and let the patient be thirsty, and eat salted and sour things, and do not drink water; and then it is necessary for him to go out because of this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument used to pull the saliva is, when you can see it, similar to curved tweezers that can enter the throat; it should be shaped like a surgeon's forceps, with roughness from lime so that it can grasp and not let go; here is its shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	There are many types of abscesses, as the recollections that come after one and another in this book show, and they differ in perforation and size; and there are two kinds, one in its appearance itself, and in what it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second kind is due to the locations where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundations, and the abscesses of fleshy places are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And with abscesses one must not pierce until the bowels are dead according to their completion; and there are some that one must pierce when they become crusty, and they do not die according to their completion, like abscesses that are near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near joints, and one lets it be so long that it is pus around, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb.Et si il le percierent, et il se curast adés, si est cause de grant mal a celui qui a la jointure, car il ne puet remuer li meisme membre tant qu’il vult.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Where the abscess is near the principal member, and you delay piercing it until it is mature, it will harm the principal member; where it is near the fundament, one must pierce it so that it may be cured; and one must not pierce an abscess without digestion being complete, except for one that is near the fundament, lest it burst inside and become elongated, and a fistula ensues, taking a long time to heal.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And one should know the time of piercing an abscess that is mature according to its digestion, and it is when the pain has subsided, and the decrease in fever, and the lessening of swelling and redness, and the improvement in appetite and the appearance of pus; and one must pierce where the abscess is most dependent, and where there are signs of pus forming. And the piercing should be at a distance from the heart, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints affecting nerves and arteries, and in all places equally where there is no folding of the skin.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	For those who bend, according to the affected member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to let the piercing wait until it is confirmed with digestion complete, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it too soon, the body's venom will flow along with it, and it will be filled with filth; and perhaps the lips and depths of it will harden.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is an abscess which has been pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you must treat small abscesses with small incisions; and large abscesses with large incisions, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses that one should chew the skin, and cover; when it has become as soft as a drape, and is deadened, then one must do the same as for blisters: and if there are some that are split into three angles, and some which one covers just like the fruit of the myrtle; and if there are some where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those which have no head, like a superficial abscess, one must pierce it fully; and when the abscess is large, and has collected a lot of pus, if you do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but some part of it; then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out something again from it; do this several times from time to time, until all the pus comes out; likewise if the patient is very weak, or a woman carrying a child, or a small child, or an old decrepit man.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For sometimes an experienced surgeon jumps with the release of gas from the belly, which may kill the patient, and you would not know it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced the abscess, cleanse the wound, and look to see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a plain cut, apply a tent made of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, then insert a tent in each one so that they press against each other; and if you have slit the skin around the abscess and pulled it open, then fill it with old cotton or dried linen rags without moisture, and tie it up for three days; then remove it and treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs in your work, bring cold water and vinegar, and moisten the cloth, and place it over the bleeding area many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding persists, apply treatment and healing, and use the powders I have described in this book with your hands; and if it is winter, and the area around the abscess is very nervous, place wet tents and clothes drenched in warm wine and oil over it; but if it is summer, and the area is fleshy, place wet clothes drenched in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, over it for a third of a day, as we have said; then cut into the abscess, wash and clean it, and treat it as needed until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And so it is necessary to understand generally in the treatment of abscesses; now I have told you how one must go about treating abscesses, and see this chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	From the neck come small abscesses, which are common in people who work in wool, like the pimples on a goat's udder; there are many variations of these.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fatty and others where there is moisture as well as pulsation; and there are some that are hard and stony in texture, and there is no doubt if the artery does not cause a contrary effect.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the operations of the waist are such that you should test all instruments called "dislocators", from which the forms come later, what they contain.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, they will push it out from above the length.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is evacuated, they will scorch it without leaving anything behind that contains the moisture, for it will return again if nothing is left; then plunge cotton into Egyptian ointment, if present; otherwise, in water and salt, and apply to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and those who remain overnight will recover.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then restart the cotton, as before, on the second day and the third, until you know it will not stay during the night; then treat the wound with ointment that is appropriate, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess contains pus, treat it as follows: cut it according to this form from the long side; and pour out your fingernails, and scrape off all of it, and put all of your treatment on drawing out the pus beneath the skin where it lies; and if the artery makes a noise against you, do what I told you after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also treat an abscess if it is piercing, and cutting and treating as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the cut on the piercing abscess and moistness is lighter, because they are full of blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if any of these abscesses have no moisture in them, and these were the abscesses that I opened in a woman's head; and I found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and it could not be broken; and if someone had cut into them, they would have caused just as much bleeding as if they had cut into a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	For other abscesses coming from the head, or those that come from the heads of children and the roots of the ears, the opening should be left uncovered for as long a time as possible, so that pus can issue out; and treat it as it should be treated.
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times abscesses occur on the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin area, and sometimes they come elsewhere in the body, and they are large, and some are joined together.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly located within its own section, as are the nodule and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many similarities among these scrofulae.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and others that are stubborn and do not want to heal.And li chiés des enfans si adont qu’il ont scrophule dedens le col, ou dedens la teste, ou dedens les oreilles, ou dedens les costes, et il n’i a pas de scrophule qui ne contienent moistor et sanguine.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Here then, when you see one that is of good disposition for cauterization, and is similar in color to the body, and quiet in every part, and not swollen at the nerves of the neck or artery or duct, and not deep; then you should cover it from above, and cut away at each part, and have the two lips of the heart at an angle, if you need them, as we have said for abscesses of the head. And draw it a little at a time, and be sure that you do not cover the nerve or vein, and do not use a spatula or knife too much, so that the hand does not slip, and do not look too far ahead, but only cover what you need to.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not let you work, then put into the wound vitriol crushed, or any powders that stop bleeding, and constrict the wound; and leave it until the abscess is pacified, and the wound softens, and begins to fester.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound is healed, return to your work, so that you may complete it; then examine with your finger if any small scabs remain, and pick them off and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scab, you should not pick that scab, but ligature it with a strong double thread, and let it fall without causing harm; then treat the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, and then heal it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you pick the entire scab, you should bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now, so that no superfluity remains due to the size of the scab.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	you should attend to picking at its root, and pulling it out, and sewing it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofulae that hold superfluity, pierce there where it appears to be dying; and pierce in the same way as aforementioned, hanging down, then administer tenting with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what is remaining of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, then cure with ointment smeared on a piece of cloth, until it heals.
de squinance	of scrofula
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke of cutting the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the written account of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those with scrofula, it is necessary to cut the throat, which is called the "epiglottis"; and one should not make an incision through this, because all the veins and the lungs are affected by the disease in those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both armpits.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the channel of the lungs, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the loss that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we want to split the epiglottis, we should split it under the three or four circles, with a small slit across, between the two circles, or according to the amount of the slit in the hyoid bone; and those places that are susceptible to the splitting of the epiglottis, there should be no flesh, and the vessels should be long from there.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, then he should stretch the skin of the throat to the very edge, then split the cartilage until he reaches the hyoid bone; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then cut the hyoid bone, as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the flow of blood from the hyoid bone that is broken, and by the defect in the voice; and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed of which one doubts strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound in the heart, and heal it all along without the cartilage; then administer remedies that promote healing, until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim says that one should not do this until the throat is completely healed, and the patient is judged dead, and the lack of breath.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then they cut open the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe through the wound and thus be kept from dying; and for this reason the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease had passed, and it passes in three or four days. Then they commanded to sew up the wound and treat it until it was healed; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a maiden took a knife and stabbed herself in the throat, cutting through some of the windpipe; and I was called to treat her, and found her as good as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound and found that the blood had not come out through the throat or windpipe but instead was escaping through the wound itself.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried and sewed up the wound and treated it until it healed; and the maiden had no more trouble with her voice, and recovered fully; therefore I say that one should not be afraid to cut into the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This hernia is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a large hernia in color like jaundice, and it is much found in women; and it has two manners: natural and accidental; or the natural kind has no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental kind is according to two manners: one is similar to a hernia like a tumor, and the other manner is like an abscess that comes from an artery; and there is fear of it, and one should not operate by force except in the one that is small, and test and probe all the entrance: if you find it as soft as a tumor, and cannot be forced at all, cut it as one cuts a tumor, and pull it out to its root, if there is no way to heal it; and probe thoroughly, and treat it as it should be, until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many methods available, all of which I will describe in detail; but now I must explain the difference between a cut and a dislocation.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that discharge is hot and feverish, as long as the boil has not passed, and the pus is completed; then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With a cut there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body; it starts like a boil and becomes large; they are according to their appearances, either dry, moist, or both, and according to their color as I have described in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to the treatment of the nose, you should first test and examine it with an instrument called an "introducer", according to what its shape comes from in the following chapter.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the method of probing abscesses is to squeeze in the most moist place you find in the abscess, and twist your fingers slightly, until you feel that the pus has been discharged according to the size of the abscess; then extract the probe, and take care not to push it in too far.Et s’il avient que li estrumens soit si dur qu’il ne porrat pas aler si loins ou il fust necessaire, mets li estrumens sus li pomer et li col de l’aposteme, et par le fort de la force, leve li deuxis et tire li col a toi; et si tu vees que li col soit si dur qu’il ne porrat pas aler si loins ou il fust necessaire, mets li estrumens sus li pomer et li col de l’aposteme, and by the strength of your force, lift the two sides and pull the neck towards you; and if you see that the neck is so hard that it cannot go as far as necessary, place the probe on the head and the collar of the abscess, and with a strong effort, lift the two sides and pull the neck towards you.Et s’il avient que li col soit si dur qu’il ne porrat pas aler si loins ou il fust necessaire, mets li estrumens sus li pomer et li col de l’aposteme, et par le fort de la force, leve li deuxis et tire li col a toi; and if you see that the neck is so hard that it cannot go as far as necessary, place the probe on the head and the collar of the abscess, and with a strong effort, lift the two sides and pull the neck towards you.S’il avient que l’aposteme soit en la fesse, ou il ne porrat pas aler si loins ou il fust necessaire, mets li estrumens sus li pomer et li col de l’aposteme, and with a strong effort, lift the two sides and pull the neck towards you.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the pus runs freely, no matter what color it is, treat it as I have said for other abscesses; and if no pus comes out after the incision, know that it is a fatty abscess, so treat it in the form of a cross, and take it with tweezers, and lightly scrape each side and examine the skin where it lies, to draw it out healthy with your nail; and if you cannot draw it out healthy, draw it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if nothing is left in it, it will return many times; and if a little remains and the wound does not trouble you, employ some corrosive powders on the wound, and tighten the wound, and apply healing abscess remedies until it is healed; and if the wound is large, cut the two lips of the wound, and treat it with what creates scabs.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein pulsating is contrary or other, you hurry and apply powdered vitriol to the spot, and leave it for 2 days or 3, until the wound suppurates, and the blood flow subsides; then return to cover what has remained of the night.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of the instruments for probing, and they come in three varieties: large, medium, and small. There are also three types of probes called "albaret", one type is called "breb", and there are three varieties of these: large, medium, and small, to probe abscesses and fistulas. They are similar to the needles used for sewing up wounds, made from brass, iron, or silver. The yellow-colored ones are more effective for probing fistula cavities, and they are also available in black steel, best suited for probing fistula cavities. They come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the opening.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of the probes vary greatly, as you can see: large, medium, and small. There are also probes with two curves that come in three varieties, and probes with three curves which are also available in three sizes. Probes with a single curve come in two varieties, and all these types are essential for different purposes.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The chief of these, with which one cuts, are sharp, and there are some that only cut on one side, which are used to scorch the nose, so that one does not cut the vein or nerve; and with such introducers, bleeding is stopped in wounds, so that the patient does not bleed to death when opening abscesses; and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see; and they are not used except in fleshy places, like legs, arms, breasts, and similar places; and sometimes a small instrument is made, resembling a slice of a clove, according to this form, with which one stops bleeding.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is sometimes placed in the place that heals by filling the veins and arteries, and sometimes they are filled according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to become corrupt, so that they look like women's breasts; and they remain ugly and swollen, and if one wants to cure them, one should bleed them according to this form from this line .b. up to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	then scorch the fat, and fill the wound with medicine, then sew up the two lips of the wound, and treat it until it is healed; and if the breast sags down, and is softened due to its size as happens to women, then make two cuts above, through similar incisions; so that one is attached to the other at the end of both, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this shape, from line .b. up to line .g.; then scorch the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and administer what we have said about sewing and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood loss, then you should fill the wound with wet cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it dissolves the remaining skin and fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from under the armpits are like hard scrofula and they have nodules, and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who retain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line b to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the content of the abscess is drained, then fill the wound with clean cotton, and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton and dress it with suitable ointment until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are like scrofula, then treat them as we have said for fissures of scrofula, and if the wound is closed, then administer cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is open and the skin above it, this often causes abscesses; and so does the swollen vein and abscess. And so one recognizes that it is from an artery when the abscess is long and deep; and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel a tugging; and when it is from a vein, there are discolored spots appearing; and it is foolishness to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the armpits or in the groin or neck or many other places, and they are large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore one must avoid cauterizing with iron, and also avoid cauterizing the head, and on that which is swollen from an artery, make an incision above the skin that the long artery is under; then cut away neatly along the edges, and separate the artery from the veins, so that it is exposed; then insert a needle underneath one of the edges, and pierce it through to the other side, and bind the artery with a double thread in two places, according to how I instructed you in the extraction of the two temples; then pierce the area between the two threads with an instrument, so that the blood that is inside flows out, and releases the abscess; then administer treatment with warm bowels, until the thread relaxes; then treat it with appropriate ointment until it is healed; and if the abscess is from a vein incision, you should dye your hand with something from the abscess all over the skin, then insert a needle underneath the area that you are holding in your hand, and pierce it through, and have a double thread there, so that you pull it from the other side; then tie the abscess as I told you at either end of the thread; and if you doubt that the thread will come out, insert another needle under the entire thread throughout the abscess at the incision site of the first needle, and bind the thread in three places; then cut the abscess so that the excess flows out, then cut the excess from the skin and leave what is tied; then place a moistened cloth with wine and oil on top, and administer treatments with poultices and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, as abscesses come in the artery and vein, they also come in the nerves when they are injured, or from too great exertion, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens most often in the shoulders and elbows and everywhere there are joints, and it is a painful abscess, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in various states without pain; and when one presses it firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not deep within the body but under the skin; and it is mute throughout, and cannot move forward or backward, or down or up, and that which is in joints should not be covered with iron: for there could be contraction; and that which is on the head or forehead, treat with a poultice.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, hold it with tongs and cut it at its root; and if it is large, slit it with a knife, and scrape it, then cut out the pus and stitch up the wound to be healed.
des grosses boces pendans	of large, hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	At times it occurs in the abdomen and nowhere else; it is a disease called "mushroom" due to its resemblance to mushrooms, with thin roots and thick branches. There are small ones and very large ones. I saw a man who had two of them on his abdomen that looked more like mushrooms than anything else, without any difference between them; they were white, had slender roots, and had split open, from which moisture flowed.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I cut them open and found that one weighed 18 ounces and the other 6 ounces. The treatment for this is to make an incision and see if the disease is moist; the color of the wart should be white and moist with thin roots. Then cut it with a spatulum, making it wide, and have the fire cautery ready in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For in surgery there are often excessive bleeding, and if the blood flows, then you must hurry to cauterize it; and if you see that the patient is terrified and fearful of the incision with the iron, then take a well-made thread, and tie the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days; then restrain it, and do not stop tightening the thread until it cuts the joint, and cuts it without any effort; and if the roots are thick, then be fearful of cutting them too, especially in the abdomen, but you can cut half, then cauterize it so that it does not grow back; then cure the wound, and be careful not to cut the skin which is a pale color and has poor sensation and a milky appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is a deep abscess, and I will come to the treatment of ulcers next.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil has burst
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the boil comes from cauterization of a wound or fissure of an ulcer, and it is on the belly and in some of the bowels, as happens in other routs, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from wind; and if it is from the rout of the ulcer and from the outlet of the bowel, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a minor thing without pain, and opens through diverse outlets.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is from the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it with their fingers, it pops out, and then returns in, and sometimes it is dried up, and increases a lot at the entrance of the bath and through hard work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a minor issue and will open easily when you press it with your hand, without any constraint; and if it is due to blood, the abscess will be large and hard, and will have a fixed amount of pus in it; and if it is due to wind, there will be swelling on the touch, and the treatment should consider whether the appearance is from arterial blood or venous blood, or from wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you are to leave the wound untreated, then:
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding both the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is due to the intestine or bowel, then instruct the patient to tighten his armpit and hold it straight, then sign around the wound all around; then have him lie down between your hands, and move around the area that you marked for the spasm, then press down on half of the abscess towards the nail, and tie it tightly with a strong thread or silk cord; then operate on the other half of the abscess above the ligature, and probe the intestine; if you find it caught in the ligature, release it and probe the intestine out of the abdomen; and if you find the bowel, grab it by the nail and cut off the excess; and if the artery or vein is causing resistance, move away from it and return to your treatment, take two needles and insert two strong threads through them, then pierce around what you have made in a cross shape; then pull the abscess in four places on the needles, and if you see anything, remove the needles and leave the wound to heal on its own; or scrape away the dead flesh when it becomes thin and healed, then treat the wound as needed and lance the abscess as we have described; then extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound appropriately and close it up.
dou chancre	for sores
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have discussed the types of sores and how to treat them with medicine, including cauterization with iron; now we shall speak of sores appearing in the throat, and great care is needed in their treatment. Ancient scholars say that when sores appear in places where they can be reached by scraping, such as on the nipples, thighs, or other similar areas, they should be completely removed at their onset. However, once they become large and chronic, one should not attempt to treat them, for I have never seen anyone healed from such sores, nor has anyone ever been healed from them before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operations, when it is in place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you sometimes purge the patient of black bile; then make him bleed if he has manifest fullness; then prepare the site for the operation; then shave the area around the ulcer and the head of the wound, and the bone all around without leaving anything; and let the blood run out completely, and squeeze well the site with your hand or something, and if the bleeding from the incision of the artery or vein makes you feel uncomfortable, cauterize it until the bleeding stops; then treat the wound with other treatments until it heals.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already described in the division the appearances of dropsy, and how the gathering of fluid is caused, and the signs of each appearance, and the treatment by medicine, and that which is cured by iron; only these two cases are mentioned: tympany and hydrops, for they are fatal conditions. Therefore, when you treat this form of dropsy called "tympany" with medicines, and the cure does not help, then consider whether the patient is weak, or has another illness besides dropsy, such as a swollen stomach and similar conditions; in that case, do not use iron, for there is danger in it. But if you see the patient is very strong, and has only dropsy, and is neither too young nor too old, then proceed thus: raise the patient upright on your hands, and have an assistant press his abdomen to force the fluid down to the lowest part of the feet. Then take a spatha with a pointed end, according to this shape:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let there be two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And let there be two parts. a point, and yet not so sharp that it can reach the intestines when it is inserted, nor cause bleeding; then examine whether the dropsy is in the intestines: if you should split below the navel on the right side of the abdomen three fingers deep; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then split on the left side of the abdomen three fingers; and if it is due to the spleen, then split on the right, and the patient must not lie on the split so that the excess fluids do not flow into that weak area; then pierce all the way through the skin with the instrument, and squeeze it, and remove your hand from the entire spatulum between the skin and the syphon as you would when skinning a finger or toe; then pierce the syphon until the fluid emerges at the desired location, and that is where the water is, then pull it out, and insert this instrument again with which there is the shape:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	It resembles a slender silver needle, and is made of lightweight bronze or brass, with a small hole in the lower part. On one side there are three holes, on another two, and on the third, one; the head is shaped like a feather, and this is the form of the incision that scribes make when they sharpen feathers:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	at the top is the vent hole, so that when the instrument comes into contact with the wound, it will release water immediately onto the wound; therefore empty out half or a third of the amount, for if you empty more than is appropriate in that hour, by chance the patient may die from the shock of the instrument, or he will faint, or he will come close to death; but empty it according to the quantity of his strength and according to what the disposition of his strength signifies, and his pulses; then withdraw the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now by the membrane which blocks the hole that is above the syphon, about which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then reintroduce the instrument the next day, if you see the patient bearing this, and withdraw a little amount of water; do this every day, and beware of fooling around until it no longer holds but just a bit of water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt the illness, then leave him in water for a long time, and apply a poultice of hot sand or warm mud, and through much sweating or bathing, and in the sun, and let him drink tinting liquids; and treat with medicines that dry up the humors until he is healed, and cauterize the stomach and liver and spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born without a foreskin, or with a small foreskin, or one that is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If necessary, cut into the foreskin with a very thin knife according to this method:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place a slender plug of wood in the foreskin, and tie it there, and keep it like that for three or four days, and when he wants to urinate, remove the plug, and he will be able to urinate, and then replace the plug; sometimes this is not necessary because the urine that comes out pushes aside the foreskin.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those whose foreskin is small, if they are circumcised with a sharp knife, as we have said, will enlarge.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the foreskin in its place are defective, for some are born with the foreskin at the tip of the penis, which prevents them from urinating unless they lift their penis upwards; and they cannot copulate because the material cannot reach the bladder, and this is a serious ailment.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the way to treat it is for the patient to lie on his back, then the head and glans of the penis are raised up like a feather, as thick as a pen, so that the opening is in the middle, as it should be; and beware of bleeding which often occurs there, and if it does, stanch the flow with something that stops blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of pustules on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times this albata occurs on the penis, and it is an ugly-looking growth; there are both malignant and non-malignant types; therefore you must take them with a small, sharp knife, cut them and clean them all, then put wet cotton in Egyptian ointment on top; then cure with thin ointment until they are healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, discolored and putrid, then you must apply cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cut it, and if the ulcer is on the shaft of the penis, and part of it is inside and part outside, then you must first remove the ulcer that is inside; and when it is healed, then cure the outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because when you treat it together, if the scrotum is not secured so that it is not pierced, and blackness and corruption come to his penis and testicles; then everything that is black and rotten must be cut off, then bind it with the ointment of honey and flour made from pomegranate rind and fennel, then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if there is bleeding, use the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauteries help in two ways together: that is, for bleeding and corruption; and if the scrotum is swollen and retracted, you must insert a hollow cane into the penis, and the patient must urinate through it; and when there is hair at the tip of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, either because of a wound or an abscess, then you must scrape away the skin with an instrument, as far as the hair, and loosen the scrotum all around, and free the penis from all parts; and if it is a difficult thing to discuss, then you must scrape it with a spatulum made of wood at the tip of the penis and the foreskin; then gently pull them apart and put a thin damp linen cloth between them in cold water so that it does not swell again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a matter of continence like other wounds; nevertheless, when we perform this act of our own will, and properly on infants, it is necessary that we make the best and lightest cut for their salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not mention the circumcision of their infants, for they did not practice it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experimentation.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen most of the masters and surgeons who perform circumcision all around the foreskin, some forcefully, and on all new borns; thus, the head of the penis would become inflamed as there are two membranes, and by chance one gets pushed upwards while the other remains underneath.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Then they cover it again, and the pain becomes doubled, and at the purification which is done on the foreskin isn't secured the tip of the member; and at the purification of the nail sometimes the cautery slips and ruins the work, and many times they are born such that they don't need purification, and I have seen this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the purification that is done forcefully all around the thread of hair, I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut justly both above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because when you press your hand, you cut evenly in all directions; but the thread should be wrapped tightly around the skin; and the method of the first operation is that you make the child think that you are only tying the thread around the rod, and then you should pull it in every way you can; then hold it straight between your hands, and press down on the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the rod and breathe into the wound, and draw it up until the head of the rod is in; then cleanse it well from the dirt that has accumulated there, then tie the place with a double thread, then tie it under the other end; and hold it with both hands by the second binding, at the foreskin and the index finger, and press between the two bindings, then lift the skin gently and pull the head of the rod; then let the blood flow little by little, because that is the wound; and put powder on top of the powder, and cover it with a piece of cloth glued with an egg cooked in rose water, confited with good and fresh rosemary oil, and leave it until the next day, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The shape of the forces for purification is as follows: both heads should be tense and pointed, and the heads should be as large as the palm equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	the error of purification is when the pus within the incision has dried up; therefore, you must extend it with your nail, so that the pus forms an abscess; and then cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, hold it with tweezers and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it persists for 3 days, and that which is beneath the foreskin is swollen, let it be until the abscesses are healed and the skin slightly peeled; then cut it as much as you can, and beware of the foreskin, it will not harm him in any way.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, heal the area of the wound with powder, as we have said in the treatise on powders; and if it cuts too deeply into the skin, and it goes above, it will not harm him; therefore, heal it, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	from the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to the obstruction of a stone, or congealed blood, or a tumor, or similar conditions, as we have said in our discussion of these matters. If the urine is not released and you see that it is being retained by a stone lodged in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent forward at the waist, with his feet placed on his back and his abdomen pressed down from above the waist, and he should strain as hard as he can. This will force the neck of the bladder upwards, causing the stone to pass and the urine to flow; if it does not, as we have said, and the patient experiences great pain, then you must apply suction with an instrument called a "syringe," which is crafted as follows: it should be made of fine silver, as light as a bird's feather, with a length of one and a half palms, and thin at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the manner of urination is that you take a double thread and tie it to the tip of some wool or cotton, and insert the tip of the thread into the syringe; and squeeze out the excess wool and insert it into the syringe up to the root of the penis, then lubricate the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and have the patient sit on a chair, and raise the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water; then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the body; then fill the syringe up to the bladder, and feel the patient urinate until the bladder is empty, and if this is not done in this order, it is because the person guiding the syringe is doing it wrong; then pull out the thread through all the wool, and the urine will follow the wool; then remove the thread, and let the urine flow; and repeat the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	of diseases of the bladder:
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When burns or blood come in the bladder, or pus is accumulated there, and you see water and medicine distilling, then do this to all of the instrument that is called "clepsydra", and it is formed:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed and has three openings: two on one side and one on the other, as you can see. The suitable medicine to shorten the urethra without addition, so that moisture can be drawn out and pushed in when necessary; and when you see your medicine moving within the bladder, place the end of the catheter in the moisture and draw it up to where it is, thus drawing the moisture into the catheter; then push strongly on the catheter, allowing the moisture to enter. Now it will go into the bladder and the patient will feel it; this is the form of the subtle catheter with which they catheterize the bladder: so it is made:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is made of silver or bronze, and has the head higher up, and below are two strings attached to it; then take a sheep's bladder and put in it the moisture with which you want to catheterize the bladder, then tie the two strings formed from a strong thread together, and heat this moisture over fire; then insert the end of the catheter into the urethra, then hold your hand over the bladder and squeeze gently until all the moisture goes into the bladder so that the patient feels it. And if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle of it, piercing it with a hole around; then thread the strong thread through these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a wheel, and put inside what you want of oil, moisture, and water, and tie it in the instrument. Then do as you did with the bladder, squeezing with your hand until all the moisture goes into the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already discussed in the division the methods of stone extraction, along with medicines; and I have said the difference between a stone lodged in the urethra, and all the signs, and in which type of stone one should operate on cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder occurs more often in children, and it is a sign that the urine exits from the bladder resembling water in its subtlety; and it opens up like an onion, and the patient feels pain in his penis, and he can urinate many times, and then it blocks again; and many of these stones cause a fundament; and the healing is easier for children until they are four years old, and it is very serious in the elderly, and it is intermediate in those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is fitting first to cleanse the patient through enema, to draw out all the feces which are in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it sometimes blocks the search for the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet and raise him up and move him about, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it comes out from above; then let him sit between your hands, with his arms underneath his thighs, so that the bladder is completely bent downward; then examine and feel inside; if you sense the stone in the space, then hasten now to cut upon the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not come out with the touch, then moisten your left index finger with oil, if the patient is old, or your middle finger, if the patient is young; and insert it into its anus, and examine the stone, and when you sense it with your finger, then draw it to the neck of the bladder; then press upon your finger and draw out the stone from where you see to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to extend his fingers up with his right hand, and with his left hand pull back the skin under the testicles in the area where one performs the incision; then he fills the spatulum, which is the mold.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And cut between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the side of the left buttock; and be straight on the stone, and your toes be next to the anus, and let the incision be diagonal so that it is wide at the top and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large; by chance, the pressure on the toe which is at the anus may cause it to pop out without any effort; and know that there is a kind of stone in which there are angles and edges: it is difficult to extract; and there is another kind which is below, resembling a grape, and round, whose extraction is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	For those with angles and edges, make the incision larger; and if it does not pop out, you should grip it with tweezers that are like a file at the tip, to extract the stone so that it doesn't escape; or you insert a tube under it, which is thin at the tip; and if you cannot grab it thus, then widen the opening, and if there is no blood, then crush it with vitriol; and if there is more than one stone, then first insert the largest into the neck of the bladder, then push it in, then pull out the one further up, and the smaller ones after if there are several.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then it must be seared, and a larger wound made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either he dies or urine escapes through the opening where the urethra cannot heal; but nevertheless strive to pull it, or scrape with tongs until you have pulled it apart in pieces; and when you have finished your work, use incense and myrrh and dragon's blood on the wound, and constrict it, and put over it a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rosewater and cold water to soothe the hot abscess; then rebind the injury around his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, wash the area well with oil and water, then treat the wound with thin ointment and thick ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if hot abscesses and scorching and blood congealing in the bladder, and urine is retained as a result, all of which is perceived in such a way that it emerges with the urine: then press your finger into the wound and draw out that blood, for if any remains, the bladder will be harmed and burst; then wash the wound with water and garlic and salt, and treat him in every way you know until he is healed; and it is fitting that each time you treat him, you bind his two thighs together and apply remedies to the area.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small and lodged in the urethra and embedded there, and the urine cannot pass; then the treatment I have described above, which you should cut many times, is an excuse for not cutting during this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have tried this before.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take an iron needle with three pointed ends and insert it into a hot brand:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the penis under the stone so that it cannot move back into the bladder; then push the needle into the penis gently until it reaches the stone; then turn the needle in your hand within the stone a little bit at a time, until you can pierce the stone from another side; then urine will flow immediately, then press your hand on what is left of the stone inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is broken at once and comes out with the urine, then the patient is cured; and if you cannot do this for any reason that they are resistant, then tie a thread under the stone and another above, then spread the penis over the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and untie the string, and cleanse the congealed blood in the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of women's stones
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It sometimes happens that a stone is lodged in women's bodies, and if it does, the cure is difficult due to three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; the second is that one cannot find a skilled female healer who can be trusted, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman well skilled in this art of midwifery; and the fourth way is that the woman's stone is more deeply embedded than a man's, so it requires a deeper incision, and there is great fear involved. And if necessity arises, one should take a midwife who is very knowledgeable, and with difficulty persuade her, and if one cannot persuade her, then one should use a very subtle cast; and present to her a wise old woman experienced in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and instruct her to do what you command regarding the examination of the stone. And be sure to examine carefully whether the woman is a virgin: then she should insert her finger into the vagina and look for the stone; and if she finds it, she should press it beneath her finger, and recommend that she inserts her finger into the vagina where the pain is, and press her left hand firmly over the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she has a hernia, she should move it gradually from the bladder to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then press on the stone at the root of the thigh towards the middle, where there is movement in the part where you feel the stone; do not move your finger over the stone or underneath it, and make the incision small at first. Then stitch up the incision if you feel the stone has been cut so that it can come out; know that there are many types of stones: small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and some with hair on them.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	you will know what to look for in order to identify the type of stone.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood comes out, apply ground vitriol and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your task and remove the stone, having prepared the instruments I have described for extracting stones in men, to assist you in your work. And if the blood flows and it is from an artery that has been cut, apply the powder to the site and use bandages and tourniquets, and do not re-open it; leave the stone and do not attempt to remove it, lest the patient die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the swelling has gone down, return to your work so that the stone comes out.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Ramice aquouse is nothing other than an accumulation of moisture or white pus, which is located under the heart of the testicles, within the egg; and it is called "pus," and sometimes it is properly located in the membrane of the egg, if one believes that it is not the same egg.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramice is due to weakness that comes to the testicles and is spread out from there.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: or it is yellowish, or red-free, or black, or watery white, and so on; and these are the signs by which we recognize this disorder. For if it is in the white syphilis that we have mentioned, then the abscesses are soft, as long as a fig, and do not burst the testicles, for there is moisture all around them.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	If there is moisture in the testicle itself, then the abscess is soft with part of an egg, and because of this one thinks it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white syphilis, then one feels it well. So when you want to know the color of the moisture, test all over the scrotum, from which the shape is described above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, then, what comes after the insertion point, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, the patient should be healed according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then he should lie on his back on something slightly raised, and have a lot of sheets underneath him; then he should sit up on his left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs of the heart; then take the lit spatula, and cut the skin of the ribs between them from the long end down to the armpit, and the incision should be straight as you cut the skin of the ribs up to the white part of the shoulder blade, and cut it carefully according to your strength; then pierce the acromion plain with water through a large hole, and draw out all the water, and then put in your fingers, and raise the acromion upwards; and do not touch the heart, but only the acromion; cut all around it carefully, just as you cut the ribcage, or the water will return; and if the egg leaps out during your work, return it to its place when you have finished the work of the acromion; then bring together the two edges of the heart with a stitch, then treat the wound as the others, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then you must tie off the suspended vessels, fearing the flow of blood; then cut open the scrotum throughout its suspension, extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	If the water is collected in two parts together, know that these are two haggles; then press the other part as you did the first one equally, then wash off the blood, and put on the wound soft lamb's wool soaked in rose oil; and put into another lamb's wool moistened with wine and oil, and place it over both haggles, and place doubled-up sheets on top, and bind it up all along the line which is according to this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two sheets and fill them with wool according to this appearance, and have them sewn together at the crotch of the breeches; and one of the heads presses upon the fundament up to the back, and the other on the part of the armpit; and the other two heads upon the two angles, and all the binding is made in the buckle of the breeches; and sometimes this haggle is treated by cautery instead of an incision with a knife; and one takes a thin scalpel, and cuts the skin of the haggles, and it is scorched as we have said so that the white sac containing water is uncovered; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that sac at the joints, and scorch it with this thin hot cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the cup in every way that you can, as long as you stretch everything out; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is safest; and move carefully to prevent blood flow, and changes in the wounds of the incision; and if nothing makes you do the opposite, either in abscesses or blood flow or anything else, then cure what makes you do the opposite, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this treatment because of its horror, then administer perforation as I have told you, and when you are certain by the signs that we have mentioned that the water is gone, then let the patient sit on a high seat; then pierce the abscess in the part below all the way to the lung, and place the perforation deep into the body; and make the holes wide so that all the fluid flows out; then put cotton over the wound and tie it, and let the remaining fluid flow out, then cure the wound until it is healed; and if the white membrane does not allow the fluid to exit through the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a feather or the instrument used to treat dropsy patients, of which the shape is described earlier; and make the wound larger, and know that the fluid will return and collect again after six months or so, and when it has collected as before, the patient will recover.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the testicle abscess
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the incision of this branch there are many dispositions of fear, because of which it seems better to leave it, and I will tell you the work and appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come in the body, especially in the testicles; and it is because of various causes.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to be known by an acute surplus and ague, which is spread to the bowels, or from a blow; and the color of the abscess follows the color of the body; and it does not hurt, and it is a serious abscess; and sometimes there are gray, fearful, and fleshy abscesses, and a flowing color, and at times it comes from an artery, or from inflammation of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from an artery, it is known by the hot disposition of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and you must not touch it.Et s’il est de voine, il est conus par coldure et blance, ou de nout d’artere, si est conus par color de sang.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Those who are affected by swelling of the vein are known by their appearance and the feel of the testicles, and one can correctly make the incision on this basis, and on other similar cases; you should cut the scrotum, then the testicles will be above, and the white substance will be exposed, and the suspensory ligament of the testicle will be freed from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the testicle is already damaged by these diseases, then you must cut it and cop it; and if it is gangrenous in the scrotum or in what is inside the vessels, then you must free all that membrane and cop it roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the crack is at the back of the shell, then you must crack it all and extract the egg as we have said.Et s’il y a u neuue char ou dedens la tenve, si covient que tu la cope et la delivre, et mets l’uef en autre vaissel.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is done, then dress the wound with soft wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the testicle abscess
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is a kind of abscess wrapped in a wrapper similar to a plum, with the softening of the testicles, and the disease moves painfully when it wants to; and the cure for this disease is as effective as the previous one, and yet we will tell you its action according to what the ancients did.Li ancien disoient que l’on doit delivre li susdiz aposteme de toute tenve qui le confoint, et li coions aussi, selonc la similitude qu’il a a borjon, et delivre li testicoles de totes pars, et li suspensoire ausi.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary for you to have the patient sit on an elevated seat, then tie the suspensory of testicles down with your fingers, to all the vessels that are close to the penis, and tie them tightly, and stretch them out properly; then cut through the vessels with a sharp knife in a straight line, so that they are exposed, and then scorch from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries in the temples; then insert a needle where there is a double thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein came, and tie it directly to the other end; then draw them gently according to the length of the body, and along the moistened vessels; then cure the wound as with the others, or with a bowstring, so that no vessel that nourishes one of the testicles is cut; for this does not cause harm, and if veins appear in all the vessels, then the testicles must be drawn at all the vessels; so that the oxygen does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and they dry out and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rotgut wound
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The occurrences of this hernia are through the opening that comes from the scrotum, or the extension over the abdomen in the region of the groin, causing the intestines to descend from this opening to one of the testicles; and this opening is in the scrotum, or from its extension, and these two types of hernias come from many causes: from percussion, or jumping, or coughing, or lifting a heavy load, and through similar actions. The sign that it is an extension from the scrotum is that it happens slowly over a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the hernia is even all the way to the bottom, because the scrotum presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of the section of the sinus, that it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and there are different abscesses appearing underneath the skin close to the surface, and it is due to the discharge of the intestines and the body from the sinus.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the fester comes with the intestines, and is retained inside, and causes great suffering to the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments using iron, there is fear, which is why one should avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the method of treatment is to instruct the patient to bring the intestine back inside through the wound with his hand, if he can; then hold his scrotum between your hands and lift the testicles; then press on the abdomen above them, and grab all the skin of the scrotum from the top; then insert your fingers into the opening of the groin according to what you need to open the wound, so that the intestinal loop can exit; then scrape the scrotum that is under the skin of the testicles, until the hard white scrotum is exposed all around; then insert your index finger into the space between the testicle and the scrotum, in the space between the white scrotum and the second testicle, and separate the one behind the testicle from the second testicle; then move your right hand inside the scrotum, and hold the white scrotum up with your left hand, and lift the testicle towards the abdomen, pulling it away from the scrotum; and instruct the assistant to extend the testicle upwards and loosen what is behind the ligature; then feel with your fingers if there is any intestinal loop wrapped around the hard white scrotum, and if you find anything, pull it back into the abdomen; then take a needle with a thick thread made of 10 threads, and insert it through the back part of the scrotum, which is after the skin of the testicles; then grab the ends of the threads that appear, until there are 4 threads; then tie them together in a cross-shape, and tie up the scrotum with a strong ligature in two places; then wrap the thread around the testicle, and tie it tightly in two places, so that none of the blood vessels that supply it can enter, so that no hernia occurs; then place the second ligature according to the first long ligature two fingers from it; and after these two ligatures, leave the scrotum that is under the testicles the width of a finger; then grab the part under the skin of the scrotum, as we said before, so that the blood vessels are cut off; then apply moist wool to the wound, and tie up the ligature as we have described.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white syphilis that we have described is cauterized after the incision, due to doubt about blood flow.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens many times, and leave the bandage on until it bites through; and if it is slow to fall off, then use a hot water poultice, and apply what we have said above, until it drops off; then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the old ones said that it is made like the ramie fiber which is together with the thread, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after cutting above and below lightly; then cut them open halfway down, and treat the abscess with what was mentioned, until the vessels burst; then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes the rot enters into the veins as mentioned, and opens up the area; and none of the intestines come out to the testicles, and if any do come out, it is a little bit, and it repairs itself every hour; and even if it remains too long in that state, it causes swelling and pain in the area where the intestines come out; and this happens because of the extension of the syphilis into the veins, as we have said, for it is stretched, then becomes soft and swollen and opens up; and its treatment is by cauterization, as we have said before; and sometimes it is treated by iron in the following manner: the patient lies on his back between your hands, then cut open the area of the rot with a broad knife according to the amount of three fingers; then draw out the syphilis which is under the skin that the sweat comes from, then take the thread and place it over the visible part of the syphilis; and press it deeply into the lower abdomen, then cut the two visible parts of the syphilis on the head of the thread, and cut both; then draw out the head of the thread, and do not cover or stretch the syphilis, nor anything else, as I have made you aware in the treatment of intestinal rot; then treat it by wound treatment.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, it cleans and cures the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	Syrup is constricting and has no appearance in the wound, and cautery is better for this purpose and closer to safety.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the testicles becomes soft in some men, because the parts inside are softened, and it appears milky white; and when one wishes to treat this, he should make the patient lie on his back, and cut the softened skin on top of the natural skin; then bring together the two edges of the wound with a single stitch, and if you see that there is excess softened skin, sew it shut with three or four stitches firmly; then cut between the stitches, and treat it as you would other wounds until it heals, and remove the thread.
dou chastrement	of chastisement
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	You should know that castration is forbidden in our law, and because of this, I would prefer not to discuss it in this book. However, knowledge of castration is necessary for two reasons: the first is so that doctors can answer questions about it and know how to perform the procedure; the second is because we often need to castrate certain animals to aid us, such as bulls, rams, goats, and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say, then, that castration is done in two ways: by attraction or by cutting.Car si on atract le membre qui est entre les deux testikols et li testikols, il est fait par atraction; et s’il est fendu, il est fais par fendure; et la fendeure doit être a l’enbas du membre et a l’enbas des testikols.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In that which we do by traction, we cause the animal to sit in hot water until its joints are loosened and hanging; then squeeze them with your hand until they are reset and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	On the castration of the testicles: you should dye the animal and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and cup each testicle in turn, once you have well-scrotched them; and leave some powder of the simple syrup and the subtle syrup which is on the vessels; and this manner of castration is better than that which is done by traction, because with traction something may remain in the testicles, causing the animal to desire lust; then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways in men: one is that between the testicles there appears what looks like a woman's genitals, with hair, and sometimes it even discharges urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other method is for women, and it has on the buttock a rod-like protuberance and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for men and women is to treat the hernias as you would any other hernia; but in the second type of hernia in men where the urine exits through the scrotum, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the testicles
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	A hernia is a swelling above the natural opening, so large that it is ugly to behold; some women have them as big as a hand, and that is the treatment for them.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	You should dye the excess of the hernia with your hand or fingernails, and cup it gently; do not push too hard or blood will come out, then treat the other hernia until it is healed; and for another type that exits at the mouth of the anus, use a mixture of honey and vinegar, and perhaps it will disappear, and it is like a pustule, and so they call it "cow's disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you must treat it, as we have said, with cautery, and heal it until it is cured.
de erratique	of erratics
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	It is errant if the nature of the woman is not understood, or the passage is small; and it is natural from birth, or accidental due to illness that comes to it; or it is due to a foreign object, or a ulcerous or thick growth, and it is formed as a deep cavity in the womb, or in the sides, or below, or wherever; and they should understand conception and childbirth, and perhaps flowers to have; and the knowledge of this is through the examination of the vagina.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the tumors are visible nearby, then use your fingers or a probe.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is from a ulcerous growth and it is nearby the lips, then do this: place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then form the lips, so that the ulcerous growth is pushed in, and cover the tumor; then take wool, moisten it in oil, and place it over the area, and have the woman lie at home every day so that it may not heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the ulcer is hard and thick, then you must cut it with a spatulum like a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is from a fresh cut, then stop the bleeding and apply medicine to stop the bleeding, such as dragon's blood, incense, and egg white; then take a large piece of wool so that the wound does not close; then let it be for a long time, and apply a dressing of dry linen; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when there is fresh blood in a wound, it must be covered in this way, unless it is an abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For one must not cut into an abscess that is in the breast.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are veins that open without custom, and when hemorrhoids are old they become התלול (telul, meaning 'steep' or 'perpendicular'). We have already described their appearances, signs, and treatments in the section on wounds.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and thrombosed external hemorrhoids, when they are perfectly formed in the anus and do not appear on examination, are not cured by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those which are at the mouth of the anus, one can feel; these can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, you should put the woman in a cold room; then, use tweezers to remove the hemorrhoids at their roots and powder them with medicines that constrict blood vessels, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, and similar substances; then, bind her feet to the wall for an hour, then place her in cold water. If there is any discharge of blood, have her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate bark, galls, and similar ingredients. Then take barley flour, mix it with honey and garlic, and make a poultice out of it to apply to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it is stopped up, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, make him breathe through ventouse cups on his back and nipples without bleeding them; then take a blanket, soak it in juice of plantain or dogwood with old wine, and have him breathe over the affected area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has drained, treat the wound with ointment until it heals; and if it is called 'albathir', which is red and looks like rough ash, cover it as I said before; then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	Here is the translation of the text into English:
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses arise in the body, such as sores and pus-filled abscesses and herpes and boil and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have described in the classification.Et li apotomes de fevre sont plusors: or l’un est de la fleme; or l’autre est de sang; or l’autre est de sang et de fleme.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary that I speak in this treatise of the hot abscess that occurs in the bowels, which is not among the abscesses that are found in the body; and if you wish to know the nature of iron, observe whether the abscess is sharp at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and whether it becomes red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	So do not be in a hurry to pierce it, but let it drain as long as the pain is relieved; and then let the patient sit on a seat, and have two small seats for him to lean on, and support his back and rest his feet against something firm; and let his buttocks be spread out, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good ligature; then suck the orifice towards the right side, and administer the instrument used to open the orifice of the abscess, through which the pus comes out later; and it is necessary that when you administer this instrument, you insert the rod first to determine the depth of the abscess, so that what goes into the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not hurt the patient; and if the instrument is larger, cover the depth of the abscess with fabric so that the instrument does not cause discomfort; and let him hold the nozzle of the instrument up, and tighten the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess is opened and they make it in the soft hand, then it must be covered with a bandage at the head, with a light sponge; and when the bowels are evacuated, then you should put into the wound moist tents in rose oil, or in dry green oil; and put the tent out of the wound at the bottom of the wound, and put a poultice over the wound and over the wound a clean linen cloth moistened in water or malva leaves that have been cooked; then cure after two days of ointment, until it is healed; and sometimes raise the wound and the wound by an enema of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lilies and aristolochia that have been cooked for a long time; then return to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is closed in the wound, then you should guard against cooking with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	It is first necessary for the midwife to know the natural shape of childbirth, and the signs that it is time when you see the woman pushing downward, and wanting to smell the air; then hasten the child to come out; then you know that this childbirth is according to nature, and the afterbirth comes out with the child, and the mother's superfluities are cleaned away through good purification; and one who comes in a different way does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For sometimes it comes out feet first, or head or shoulder first, or by the arms; it may come out upside down, or in other bad positions; so the midwife must be wise and cunning in these matters, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the different ways to assist.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the baby is born head-first in a natural delivery, and the woman is struggling, and her vitality is weak, then have her sit on a stool or be supported by other women; prepare an aromatic oil made from cooked celery seed or fenugreek, and then use a small spatula to apply it between her buttocks, as follows:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and split the membrane, and press on her nail until the moisture that is within flows out; and press the belly of the woman so that the child descends, and if it does not descend, then the woman must be clistened with a poultice of fenugreek and olive oil; then have her press and sneeze with incense, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now let the child come out.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands come out, then you must gently reset them little by little; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a chair, and lift her feet up; then stand the chair on the ground, and hold one the woman so that she does not strain while standing; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child is dead, then grab the hands at the nail which was mentioned before, and pull out the child, and reset in the same way.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the child's feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes out of its feet, it should be pushed upward; and then rock it back and forth gently until it is even; then grab one foot and stretch it gently.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If he jumps up to his ankles, instruct him to grab hold and make him sneeze from the back; if he jumps out, God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump out as we have said, then pull it back and forth gently until it is in its natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it will be easy.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if he doesn't come out as we have described, take myrrh, and olive oil, and gum, and grind them all in a mortar; and put some of this ointment inside the woman's birth canal, then make her sit in warm water up to her ribs; and when she is soft down there, make her wear a collar of myrrh around her neck, and keep it underneath, and leave it for an hour; then have her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and gently squeeze her mouth and nose, and lightly press her belly, for the child will come out now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the birth of the child on his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, put your hands on his head little by little; then lie him down on his stomach, with his feet hanging down, and let him lie on his back; and bend his arms little by little, and then press his hands on his belly, and lift up his buttocks from below, until he is aligned downward; and if the child does not cry out, take his feet and move them around, then move his belly upward, then put your hands in; and rock the child little by little; and command the woman to hold on until the child emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the child's exit, which comes out as wide as a hand
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I want to try to bring the hand back: if it cannot be brought back, then make the woman stand up and walk; if she cannot walk, then make her sit on the bed and lift her legs up straight; then apply the mustard poultice that I described; and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a chair, then work on bringing the hand back; and rock the child according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and command her to hold on until the child emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the baby's exit on its neck, and have her hands spread out, and her face turned towards her mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I want the midwife to dye her hand, then gradually turn it, and move it gently; and when it is even, she should apply a poultice of mustard and oil, as we have said, then she must command her to move it gradually; and when you have done this, make her sit on a chair, and command her to grip; and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same way for all of the afterbirth
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes out in this way all the afterbirth, then scrape away the afterbirth with your fingernail until the moisture is expelled; and if the child turns its face and neck, then scrape it from there, so that it is not retained, and the child dies; then insert the child inside, as you have placed it where it should be, and command the woman to grip several times: then release it gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens rarely.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	They are strange things and do not live, unless by name; I know that they are multiplied and separated by the stylet that divides them, which is bound to the udder; and sometimes they issue as naturally as a pig, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they issue profusely, then the surgeon should act as we have said, and be quick and skillful in his actions; and he should do whatever benefits the patient.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the womb as one, or two, or three, or four, or five, or six, or seven, or more up to fifteen, and are all shaped like children according to the measurement of the glorious sage; and the surgeon should know this, for sometimes similar things happen to them; so act according to what is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat a woman for a dead child or distended womb, as I have said in the division, and there is no discharge, and you must use manual pressure; then you should know if the woman is of sound health and free from fear of death; then the woman should be supported on her back with her head declined downward and her legs raised; and the surgeon should use the ten fingers, or she should be tied to the bed so that she does not move when the child is delivered; then the surgeon should rub the mouth of the womb with moist oils mixed with myrrh, fenugreek, and flaxseed, then anoint his hands with these oils and myrrh; then he should enter them gently into the womb, then seek the place where the child is located so that it may descend onto its head; then he should insert the fingers at the sides, or under the chin, or in the mouth, or on the palate, or below the beard, or in the throat, or near the ribs; and if the delivery is from the feet, then he should insert them at the heel and the sides; and he should use the index finger of his right hand, and place the crook between his left thumb and forefinger, and enter it gently into the womb, and insert the finger in any of the places we have mentioned until it reaches the empty space; and this is how the finger should be shaped:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	then file against the other nail, or the third if you need it, so that the extraction is even; and then they are filed evenly by moving from one side to the other, to move out, and the nails are bitten to hold, as is the form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if some remain, then anoint the nail of one of his fingers with oil and rub it in that part, and pull the other; and if nothing remains, then put the file or higher, and do this until it all comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back due to the dislocation, then you must wrap a cloth around it until it pops out; then grab the joint of the wrist or the elbow, and thus you must do for the other hand and feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the head of the child is large and it is tight in the birth canal, and it has a sharp pain gathered at its head, then you should push the spathumile [sponge] between your fingers, and press on the head and draw out the fluid; or you should pierce it with the instrument called "almidach", from which the shape comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one; and likewise do if the child has a large natural head; and then pull out the bones with tweezers, and if the head jumps out and is forced by the forceps, it should be split open so that the fluids in the birth canal come out; and if it cannot come out, pierce it in pieces as much as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you should pierce it so that the fluids flow out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the swelling is above his feet, the pulse is light, and the breath comes easily to the mouth.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is stuck in the belly or the foot, you should pull it out with the cloth wrapped around his hand; and make an incision in the belly or the foot, so that the moisture that is there flows out; and if other members are stuck, and the bowels remain, he puts his hand into the wound up to the bottom of the wound; then he puts in a hook or two, and pulls it out; and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed by a hot abscess that has formed there, one should not work on it, but rather apply moist and greasy things; and the provider applies poultices, and uses warm and softening water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the placenta is on his side, and you can make it even, then one should administer what we have said for a live child; and if one cannot do this, then pull it out in pieces, and leave nothing of the afterbirth behind.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if it is administered to those with abscesses that come in the sea; and if there is a discharge of blood, let it be placed in warm water, and give other remedies.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose fetus had died within her; then another was sewn over him, and the other died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time an abscess came in his arm, and swelled so much that it opened, and began to discharge profusely.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the priest, and I thought long and hard, but could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong drawing plaster, and out came a bone, and after a few days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very amazed, because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I lanced the wound and extracted the bone, so that the woman was in a better state; and she lived for a long time like this, and sometimes a little pus would come out of the site; and I only mention this chapter because when the master finds a strange thing, he should know how to apply a remedy.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to return the dislocated shoulder to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Hereafter comes the form of the press, to which one adds the books; and at .2 turns as .2 heads of .2 lines.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Nevertheless, the horn should be more slender than the restrictor, and it should be made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the instrument should be two digits wide, and the edges of the wood should be one digit and a half long; and in both ends there should be two adjustments of this same wood, which are firmly attached at both ends, half a digit or a little more in length; and these two adjustments are placed in the mouth of the sea to open when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, with its appearance more subtle and lighter, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the appearance of tweezers; and has at its two ends two adjustments, as you see, a palm long, and two fingers wide; and when you see open the wound all over the instrument, then make the woman lie on her bed, her feet dangling and her legs open, then fit together the two adjustments in the wound, and hold the head of the instrument between her thighs; then work your hand all over the instrument, as you did with tweezers equally, according to the quantity that you see open the mouth of the wound, until the midwife does what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all decorated, and their appearances are multiplied; and when the patient sees them prepared, the action is faster and higher in people because of their size.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despair over the instrument, but prepare it, for their need is inexcusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you should instruct the patient to hold in her breath, then make her sneeze with some scent, and pinch her nose and mouth; and if she vomits through that, all the better.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, one should take a container and make an opening in its lid, then place herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, such as calendula, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, are to be cooked in water over fire. Then place one end of a cane or pipe into the container and the other end into the mouth of the wound, and apply it so that the vapors enter the wound. Then make the patient sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the pus comes out quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment and is not cured, one should instruct the midwife to wet her left hand with oil of sesame or with musk-moss, then place it into the natural opening and search for the placenta. When she finds it, she should grasp and stretch it gently bit by bit, so that the wound does not tear during extraction; but she must move it slightly from side to side and then pull it out. Then it will come out and be dislodged.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	If the mouth of the wound is narrow, we have discussed the cure for sneezing and the fumigation of herbs; and if it is not cured by all that we have said, beware of following the wrong path; but you should tie what is at the mouth of the wound to the thigh of the woman, then cleanse it with an ointment of tetrafarmaçon; then she will pass it and recover, and it will come out; but nevertheless, when she passes it, there comes a bad odor to the stomach and head, and the disease is made worse.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If necessary, suitable fumigations should be used for this: some ancient writers have tried fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The instrument used to fumigate the woman for retained placenta and afterbirth is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	It is like glass in appearance, and its head is fine in nature, and its feet are wide on the fire; and there is fumigation over the charcoal, and the stain until it is wasted, and another one begins.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the fundament
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born without the foreskin pierced, but with a subtle hymen; therefore, it is necessary that the midwife pierce this hymen with her finger and not with a sharp instrument, and she should keep the wound clean so that it does not touch it; then she should apply moist linen soaked in wine and oil, and then cure it with ointment until it heals.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will heal, then put a wooden splint through the wound and leave it for several days, then remove it when the child wants to walk around.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes the healing comes suddenly from a wound or an abscess; then it must be covered suddenly: then it should be treated, as we have said, with a wooden splint.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the fistula of the fundament
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from under the anus are nodules, and they grow larger than those that come from within the rectum, or in the space between the two parts, whether there is one fistula or several; and when this nodule is old, it opens up, and usually white moisture or thin pus flows out, and sometimes these fistulas are bleeding. They are perceptible by the fact that the patient either expels gas or has a bowel movement when he makes an effort, and sometimes they discharge on their own.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulæ which penetrate as far as the bladder, and halfway down the penis; and they can reach the joint of the thigh, and down to the testicles.Et si a fistules qu’advenent desoz le fondement et par les costes ou par la nuque, ou par le petis de la cuixe; et sont mals aincis.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows whether the fistula is bleeding or not; and it is when you push your finger into the anus, and insert a thin needle made of bronze or iron into the fistula when there is no twist in it.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has a twist, you insert a thin probe made of lead or a horsehair, as far as you can feel the probe or hair with your finger; and if you cannot feel it, and there is no discharge or farting or pus coming from the opening, as we have said, then know that it has not yet broken through; so be quick about treating it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula penetrates as far as the bladder or the duct of urine, and urine escapes, and cannot be stopped by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced as far as the joint of the thigh, then the vein will flow as far as the site; if there is tortuosity and pain in the surrounding area, then it must be bound there, and ointments are useless; and for these bleeding fistulas, there is no cure beyond effort, and folly of those who interfere.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	For one that is not bleeding and is not old, there is hope of healing with iron, as I have experienced; and the patient lies on his back, and the leg is lifted up to the thigh, and the thigh bent towards the belly; then pierce a vein with an awl, or with lead if there is tortuosity, until you know where the vein is coming from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it around the anus, then you must push your finger in there, if you feel that the vein has pierced through; and it should be uncovered where you feel a lump or swelling on the flesh, then you know that it is bleeding; do not work on it if one cannot heal it.Si li tentens sont tortuosez entor la char, et n’a point de dolor adés que soit grant, si convient qu’il soit remes en son leu par oignement qui contrient li membres; s’il ne peut demourer ains revient, si covient il que tu le bates tant qu’il soit contriet.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One can still sometimes heal them, but this rarely happens; and the help one gives is to scorch the cautery subtly according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before; and he fills it all with heat in the fistula, as far as it goes towards the anus; and do this two or three times, until you know that these false humors are burned, which look like a feather of a bird; and then cure with moist bandages, as long as these humors come out, and then cure with ointment, closing up the wound.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is healed in this way, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it is not healed in this way, it cannot be otherwise; and if the tent goes inside and does not reach the rectum which is at the anus, and there is between your finger and the tent a thick covering of humor or of syphilis, and you see the fistula below the covering towards the anus; then cut off the beginning of the fistula, and fill it in front of the tent, and then cauterize after it, as far as it comes to the top of the tent; and the tent will be delivered, and will fall out; then remove those false humors which look like a bird's feather, and nothing will remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the pus comes out and flows between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or with an astringent medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For fire cautery draws together two things: that is, the scorching of the flesh around the wound, and the zastening of blood and drying of moisture; then the dressing of moist bandages with butter or crushed substances, until the swelling goes down and the burned flesh comes out; then treat the wound with quick-drying ointments on hard, dry flesh, and these are the dry remedies.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes all the way to the bottom of the foundation, and is removed from the body, put your finger or foundation in it, and inquire about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent and between them is the membrane or flesh, or it is about to pierce, do not lose hope and expectation through the administration of one of three methods: either cauterize as we have said, or cut it deeply to the bottom; if you can, place bandages and treat as before; do not go too deep, lest you damage the underlying structure and cause the wound to discharge; then treat as already described; perhaps it will heal. Remove that covering and clean after cutting away from the bottom membrane, by tent or other sharp instrument; then cauterize the wounded flesh in the wound, as much as you can; then work to restore the wound and keep the fistula open on the outside of the structure: this is a lighter burden for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes there are fistulas in this way: and it is when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is on the side of the foundation below the skin above, then take a tent pierced at the top according to this form.
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And he inserts a twisted thread into it, and he inserts the tent along the entire thread into the fistula until it reaches the tip.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is piercing in the margin of the foundation inside, then pull out the thread from that opening, so that you put your finger on the foundation; and pull the head of the thread, and bring the two heads together, and compress them together, and leave it for one or two days; and sometimes compress it until the threads scrape against each other and heal; then cure the wound until it is healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not open on its own, then you must make it open in every way that you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not appropriate to cover the wound with a bandage, then treat it, as we have said, until it has healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spatumile thorny, which one makes for the fistula, is very sharp on one side and smooth on the other; and not sharp on the side that one does not want to scrape, as you can see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two types: either they are inside the anus, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and some discharge blood, and there may be one or more, and they are outside the anus and at the top of the anus; but those that are outside have little moisture, and yet they discharge a little yellow water or a little blood, and have the color of the body; and the treatment for those who have them inside the anus is to instruct the patient to strain himself to go to the toilet until the anus relaxes and the hairs become visible; then you hurry and grab it with tweezers, or hold it with your fingernail, then pull it out by its roots; and if the nails cannot hold it because of moisture, they are grabbed with a piece of cloth, or cotton, or a piece of camel's hair; and they are pulled out with your fingers, then cut off, and powdered with some hot powder that is used for cauterization; or you cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterization, and then treat other ailments until he recovers; and if the anus cannot relax, you give the patient a strong, bitter enema to wash away what is inside the anus so that it can relax; when the patient strains, and the hairs come out of the anus, the treatment is easy; and you grab them with your fingernail or tweezers, then cut them off, and treat them as we have said until he recovers and fears incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you must perform surgery in this manner: take a twisted thread, and put it through a needle, and then pull the thread from above and pierce the needle from the other side; turn both ends of the thread below the needle and tie it tightly; then tie the thread, remove the needle, and do likewise with all the others, and leave one to stop the flow of blood. Then place a moistened cloth in rose oil or cerate over the wound, and apply pressure on the wound, and command the patient to rest. Then let him lie down until he feels better; when he is healed, treat it with ointment and other remedies.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	from dryness of the anus or rectum
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Drying of the bowels occurs often in the intestines, due to constipation from natural causes, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you must cut a boil at the tip of a spatula or your finger, do not let it get moist; then treat it until it is dry as it should be. If it cannot heal, cut it again more forcefully than before, until it heals and the skin is peeled; then treat it until it is healed.
dou fremit	where there is trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Ants are a small appearance formed under the body, and they move very quickly; sometimes the frost bites them, and one feels them as if dead from trembling, and they come throughout the body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a feather of an owl's feather, or a strong vulture's feather, and put that feather on the trembling, until the purple circle trembles all around it; then turn your hand over the entire feather, so as to scoop out the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see fit, make a cane of bronze or iron according to this shape, and let it be thin underneath and drawn out on top:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	nor pierced, so that it may hold the finger, and press firmly. And if you see fit, cauterize the vein, just as it is described in the chapter on cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes they are made of silver or brass, or melted copper or wire; and sometimes they are made small and large, according to those to whom they are administered.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those which are administered for the treatment of children and the weak and painful are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the small and large enema is above wide, or the belly is bound according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And there is a division where the bellies are tied, as you see, and the intestines are pierced inside; and it has two openings on one side, and one on the other; and the belly is where one puts the medicines in a beast's bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small holes, and there is an inch of space between each hole, then thread a strong twisted thread through these holes in the shape of X or around, and gather the belly like a goat; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then enema.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	Let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head with oil or egg white, or similar, then insert it gently; then press the minister's hands together around it until it is all sucked in, then withdraw the syringe, and let the patient lie on his side, and if the medicine wants to come out, let him cough as much as he can; and if he sleeps for a night afterwards, it is even more helpful.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you use the clistere for the disease of stomach ache, and the medicine rushes to come out, then repeat it until he is cured.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are in the anus or an abscess, then let the syringe be as thin as for a child; and this is the shape of the thin syringe that pulls on the skin:
des plaies	Of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already discussed in the division the cure of wounds; now we will discuss the cures by hand and medicine according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and by what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by splitting of stone, and cutting with sword and knife, or lance or staff or arrow, or similar things; or that are made according to the places in the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or the head, or the leg, or the belly, or liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and begin with simple wounds of the head, for the memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, then take care if it is from a stone or similar object, and the skin is still broken and the wound is large, and you quickly doubt a hot abscess: then make him bleed with the cephalic itself if there is little blood coming from the wound, and let the bleeding be in the opposite direction of the injured part; and keep the patient from fullness of wine and rich foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to bleed, then reduce his food intake and do not drink wine or eat meat; and put cotton soaked in rose oil only on the wound, or in astringent wine, if there is a hot abscess; and if there is no hot abscess, then put powder on the wound, if it has all its blood and has not been moved by air.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like that of a sword, and the lips cannot be brought together with tenting, then stitch them together, as I will describe for abdominal wounds.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to the bone, and can be reached with a cupping glass; then treat the wound with medicine, restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as testicles and cooked wheat, as well as meat and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find pus in the skin, and it does not reach the bone, then scoop out all of the pus and let it flow out; then treat it with medicine. And if there is a vein or artery in the wound, which causes bleeding without stopping, and it cannot be staunched with medicines, then tie off the artery and, if that doesn't help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is light; you should put on this powder which heals as soon as the burn is healed.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the method of the powder is as follows: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; quicklime three parts, and powdered very finely, then apply it to the wound, and hold it firmly in place until it dries well and joins all its blood; and then bind it up well, and leave it without loosening, if it doesn't swell; for the medicine is not removed until the wound is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one does this with chalk alone, when one doesn't have incense or dragon's blood, but that the wound is moved by the fire.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the burn has moved the wound, let it be in the same state, and do not put any of this powder on it; but apply some digestive ointments, or barley flour made with water and honey, until it is soft; then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if a bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, I will extract it with subtle tweezers; and I will tell you about fractures of the head later.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound on the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound occurs on the neck and it is single, then there is no difference between it and one in the head, but if the nerve of the neck or artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is a nerve, there is nothing else to do but let the cure proceed, and put nothing constricting on it, because it hurts the nerves and makes them withdraw; and put nothing cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member; but let the medicine be moist, as in the case of a wash made with honey and rose oil, and cooked with water, and other stones according to this method, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then cut and bind it, then treat it until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and it is a cavity and full of pus, then pierce it or a lower spot; and if an artery is cut, and bleeding ensues, then stop it, and ligature it, and cauterize it if necessary; and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the windpipe, and the passage for food is blocked, then cut the windpipe on the neck's Adam's apple, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then compress it gently, and leave it for several days, then cleanse the wound with poultices until it heals; and if the wound has affected the bone, then trepan it; and if there are bone fragments, then extract them all if you can, and those that you cannot reach, then leave them as they are until the wound granulates and is closed; and if the wound is fresh, then apply the powder I mentioned earlier.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have said in that chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a blow from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, then examine whether the wound bleeds when the wind blows on it: then you will know that the wound is deadly; but if it is not deep and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put powder on it in the first hour, nor bind it because of the blood that seeps through, and returns to the body, and kills the patient; but put on an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day; and if you have no ointment, then put old cotton in the wound to suck out moisture, and let the patient sleep with his head on the wound for three days or four, or more; then no spasms, nor bad tremors of the body, nor straining of the wind will come; and when you see good signs, then you know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat it therefore with poultices and other remedies until it is healed; and if it cannot heal, and there is a fistula, then treat it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife, and it is simple, whether in front or behind, then treat it as one who is in front; if it is large, stitch it; and if it is small, powder it, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has torn pieces, then clean the wound, and draw out the foreign bodies if they are embedded; and for other wounds in other parts, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	from a rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	Ruptures of the belly occur in great, medium, and small sizes; from a large wound sometimes the intestines or nerves of the intestines may protrude, causing the entrance of air; and stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a smaller wound is worse than a larger one, because one must stitch the intestines back in more carefully, little by little, as they are very sensitive to cold, and so they will swell up and cause more pain if stitched quickly; and so it is better to treat a minor wound by gradually replacing the intestines to their proper place, rather than all at once. And know that there are four types of rupture: two common types occur in stomach stitching, and the stitching of other wounds on the body; and two proper types are unique to other wounds. And yet they are more proper with stomach stitching, and I will explain each in turn.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small and something of the intestines has come out, and a greased object is used to push it back in, this is done by one of two methods: either due to the small size of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen from the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, heat it in such a way: moisten a sponge or soft cloth in warm water only, or cook it in water with squill and cypress and spices, and wipe the intestines until the swelling is gone; and sometimes this wine restraint is made, and it is solely for deflating.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling leaving, moisten the intestines with water or old wine in which mallows and mulberries have been cooked, for there is a tightness in the entrance due to a little thing; and if it cannot enter, then make a small slit in the wound with the instrument used to scrape out hemorrhoids; and the first cure is better than cutting, which one must not do without great necessity; and this is the instrument for splitting: cut into the curve and push outward, and see the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, then put them back according to their natural shape in their proper place, if you have the power, for this is better.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is low on the belly, you should have the patient lie on his back with his legs elevated higher than his head; and if it is high up on the belly, then he should be flat on his back with his head and feet higher than the lower parts, and also if the rupture in the belly is to one side, then the injured part should be elevated higher than the other; and thus you should arrange things as I say for both large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, use what you have at hand; then take a needle or more, depending on the size of the wound, and leave an inch of space from the top of the wound, and pierce through both sides of the skin and the subcutaneous tissue beneath with a needle so that it comes out the other side; then tie off the thread around the needle, and pull the two sides of the wound together gently, leaving another inch of space, and insert another needle; then tie off the thread again as before, and continue doing this according to how many needles you need, until the entire wound is closed up. The needles should be medium-sized, neither too thin nor too thick, so they can pierce through the skin and flesh without reopening the wound; then bend the ends of the needles so they don't poke the patient when sleeping, and put some tents or bandages over the needle heads to hold them in place, leaving them until the wound is healed. This type of suturing with needles is best for small wounds, as there is less risk of reopening the wound. I also sewed up a man's wound on his belly with this method; it had been cut with a knife, and the intestines were hanging out two inches from the wound, which was larger than a palm.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought him back to health after his intestine had been outside for 24 hours, and the wound was sewn up for 15 days, and I treated it, and he recovered.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And they looked at him and thought he would die, and it was a miracle; and I didn't treat him with ointment because I was in a place where there were no ointments or any medicine; and I put old cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you about two proper ways to sew: take the needle and pierce it from one side of the wound into the other; as soon as it has pierced the skin directly from right to right, then hold it with your fingers where you have just pierced it with the needle, and pierce it again on the other side of the wound until it comes out on the other side. The technique of this sewing is that you sew like a tailor sews pelts, leaving a flap of skin on one side, and then pulling it from the other, until the seam is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of suturing, which Galen describes properly, is as follows: take two pieces of thread and tie them together naturally, then apply one end of the thread to the other, in such a way that an needle is inserted near the wound's edge and only pierces through the skin on one side, leaving the two edges of the wound untouched; then turn the needle and pierce through from the outside, into the inside, at both edges of the wound; finally, pierce through from the outside to the inside at two other points along the wound's edge, on the opposite side, and tie off. This is the best and most common method of suturing.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen describes this procedure and some testify that one must stitch the abdomen with two needles, each with its own thread; then, one needle is pushed from one side and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew leather. Know that when the incision is in the lower abdomen, the suturing is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgments of the wound are like the judgments of other wounds: and it is that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, so that the burn has moved it, then put back the intestines and the skin; then put on the powder of the ointment, and if the burn has moved, put on some ointment that is present until the wound heals; then cut the threads, and sew up the lips, and the mirror; then cure the wound as with the others, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicine, then put on old cotton immediately when it begins to heal, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you do not need any other medicine for various dispositions when the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound will cause community in the principal members, then you should wet light wool in tempered oil, or rose oil, and put it around the anus, and under the buttocks; and if there is pain or porridge in the bowels, and it happens many times, then cleanse them with a warm black wine enema, and likewise if the porridge comes all the way to the intestines; and pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines, which are called 'young', cannot heal when they are injured, and this is due to the thinness of the veins through which they run, and the subtlety of the entire body, and their close connection to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the vein pops out of the wound, then put it back in as you would with the intestines, while it is still fresh; and if it is old and has become green or black, then you must tie off the area that is black so that no blood flow comes to it, for there are veins and arteries there; then cut what is between the ligature, and hang the two ends down from below the wound until it eases out when the vein breaks, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	of the route of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestines are pierced and the wound is small, then one can restore it in some people, for I saw a man who was wounded in the abdomen with a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and became an abscess, and from it came digestion and flatulence; I applied a poultice according to what I could, and did not cease subtilizing until he was healed, and the wounds closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him sewing up the wound, I feared that the patient would have pain in his belly; and he had no pain but stayed in better condition, eating and drinking; and some experimenters say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in this way: take a thread from a ram's testicles, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the thread has opened the mouth, put it over the two lips so that it tightens his mouth shut; then tie off the thread, and it will stay like that so that he cannot undo it, then put another thread after in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely closed; and then cut the thread.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If these wounds are in the intestine and do not cause any harm to the patient, one can sew up the intestine with a thin thread cut from an animal's intestine in this way: take the end of this intestinal thread which is very sinewy, then tie to it a thin twisted linen thread; then thread the needle and sew up the wound, and draw it tight at the end; and this method of sewing with threads is only useful according to the way of faith and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the graily intestines, there is nothing that can be done about it.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it wakes up, is universally called a "fistula", and especially when it is hooded and bowed in.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is according to the green knot, hard and white, where there is no pain, and is as hooded as the beak of a bird; sometimes it is clear bowing, and sometimes thick; sometimes small, and sometimes large; I have spoken about these causes in the division of wounds, that any wound which is not healed and has no flesh inside, except for one of nine causes: namely, due to thinness of blood or body; or because of evilness; or because there is hard matter within it, and on the lips, that does not allow pus to form; or if there is too much pus; or if the site is wounded and the matter poor in quality; or if the medicine is not good for the treatment; or because corruption is a type of pestilence; or because digestion and healing are slow by nature, and swollen; or if there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, signs, and medicinal treatments in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now I will tell you about the treatment for a fistula that is done with the hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or from the sinus, or intestine, or bladder, or any of the ribs, or the spine of the back, or from any joint of the hands or feet; and they also occur in parts that come from the principal member, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are in this way are of a grievous nature, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come to the places I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you see it, then take a tent of iron or steel, if the fistula is straight, so take it; and if the fistula is crooked, then seek it with a thin tent of lead, for the lead bends easily around the crook; and if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot properly seek it with tents, then enema through one of the openings, for moisture cuts from one opening to another, and cleanses it; then press it hard, to the best of your ability, so that you know whether there is bone or nerve, and see if it is deep-seated and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you press your hand, and where he feels it; and when you truly know the location and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places I have mentioned, then treat it according to what I have told you, and remove the rotten flesh and corruption that is inside; and then cure it until it is healed, and if the fistula is very deep and straight, then you should treat it deeply, as much as you can, then place moist tents in medicine water, and insert them into the chief of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom; and then apply ointments to promote healthy flesh, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then treat it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerve troubles the principal limbs as we have said, and if there is decay and blackness in the bone, let the king treat it until all decay is removed; then cure it with healing things while it is being healed; and if it is not healed, return bow-wise as before, know that you have not yet reached the bottom; then uncover and seek until you reach the bottom, and remove all decay, then restore the place; and if it is healed in this way, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, you know that the decay is too deep for you to reach it; then there is nothing else to do but let nature take its course; and if there is a small bone decayed and you can pull it out with tweezers, or extract it with a suitable instrument for this purpose, and if there are many bones, pull them all out one by one; and if moisture causes a contrary effect, and there is no error or fear, then cut and dry and heal.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then place something on the wound to draw out pus, and let it remain until the swelling has spread around the bone, and then the bones will come loose more easily; and if it is a large bone, such as in the leg or thigh, then draw out the corruption only as far as the darkness, and then dress the wound; and if there is a great deal of corruption, and it extends to the soft tissue of the bone, then one must scrape away and cover up the whole area until the corruption is removed, and then heal the wound; and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and aid from this in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	He was a young man of about 30 years old who had a pain in his leg from an internal cause, so that the matter came out through the leg, and it was swollen with a large abscess, and there was no reason to open it; but they miraculously worked on it until the abscess opened, and much matter flowed out, and it became a fistula, and many openings appeared from which pus and moisture poured out from his body; and many doctors treated him for two years, and there was no wise man in the art of medicine, so that I was called to see him, and I saw his leg and the remedies with which he was being treated, and what flowed from the openings was a great harm to his body; and the skin of the young man turned red, and he had a yellow color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these openings, and then searched all the openings, and found that one came against another all the way down the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hastened therefore, and probed one of the openings until I exposed a portion of the bone, and found it corrupt and pierced, and the corruption extended to the bone within; I removed what appeared to me to be of the bone, and thought that there was no other corruption except that which I had removed; and then I began to heal the wound with strong medicines for a long time, but could not close it; so I began again, and exposed the bone as before, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, and removed it, and then closed up the place; but I could not heal it as much as I probed around a palm of the bone, and drew it out completely to its very marrow, then healed it with medicines; and it was healed and closed quickly, and there was no need to repeat the operation except for the weakness of the patient who could not endure it, and because of the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the bloodletting, he often bled profusely, but he was completely healed, and in the bone a hard lump grew, and he had a good disposition and no harm or contrary effect anywhere, neither lying nor moving.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be bound in this way: take a bandage and tie it at the top of the open bone, and command someone to pull it upwards; and put another larger woolen bandage over the hard lump that is on the bone, and bind it at the top, so that you draw out the corrupted flesh from below and uncover the flesh where one can see and feel the corruption, and bind it again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is broken and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover the flesh everywhere; then place a burning brand underneath, and then draw out the corruption from one side to the other, and let the incision be as long as the corruption, as we have said; and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut through the corrupted joint, and draw out the bone on the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, there is no other way but to cut it; and if the corruption is in the knuckle of the hand or the knuckle of the foot, then that thing is very strong, but nevertheless you must inquire into this corrosion, how it appears to you; and cleanse it in every way you can, but so that the vein or nerve do not cause any harm; and know that there are many types of cutting instruments for covering these bones, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and thinness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness. And therefore one must prepare a tool for each type of work; and know that the craft will show you the tool you need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; then choose the tool you need according to what is appropriate.
dou feu	fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The head can become dislocated due to internal causes or external forces. And when you have treated this injury with remedies but they do not help, then cover the affected limb up to where the corrosion occurs so that the patient escapes death, or the greater harm, from the defect in the limb; and the signs are that the limb becomes black, as if burned by fire, and then it turns red under the blackness, and this corrosion spreads from limb to limb throughout the body. If it is caused by the sting of some venomous creature, such as a sea scorpion or snake, and the injury is on the head, then cover it and give it no space to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it reaches the hand, then cover it at the joint so that the corrosion does not reach the arm; and if it reaches the arm, then cover it at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, then it is fatal, and there is no remedy but to reduce the amount of poison according to its virulence. And this is how you cover a limb: you bind it above and below with bands, and extend one band downward, and another band upward, and you separate the flesh that is between the two bands with a spatumile as wide as possible so that the bone is exposed; then cover it with a linen cloth on both sides so that the cloth does not touch the healthy area, and bring the patient another injury and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	If bleeding occurs when you operate, cauterize the wound thoroughly or apply some restraining powders; then return to your treatment until it is complete. Then bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage and treat it until it heals. I will tell you what happened to a man on his foot: he developed a darkness that looked like a burn, and this corrosion first appeared on his big toe on his foot, spreading throughout his foot; and when the man saw the corrosion, he wrapped his foot, and it healed. A long time after, the corrosion reappeared on his fingers, and he came to me, and I placed some reflective substances on him after cleansing his body, but I could not stop the corrosions. He wanted me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to do so because I had hope of driving out the matter. I was also afraid that if I cut off his hand, he would die, for the man's strength was weak. He despaired completely, returned home, wrapped his hand, and healed; and I have never heard of anyone else doing this who needed it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	At times an abscess forms in a fleshy area, and remains so long that it causes a great gathering of pus; then it erupts and pierces, and the pus flows out, leaving the spot hollow like a vessel; the skin above is as delicate as a torn cloth, and does not heal all the way to the bone or nerve, and such a disease is called 'sore', and is not called a 'fistula'; but if it extends so far that it reaches the bone deeply, then it is called a 'fistula'; and the skin is such that you can cover it all around, and especially when it is delicate, like a cloth; and it does not heal by formation of scar tissue.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you have confidence that the skin is healing, and the corruption is not deep, and the flesh is thick, then he is treated with a clyster as follows: examine whether the breast is swollen, and the pus which comes from it has an offensive odor, then clyster with Egyptian medicine which is made thus: take equal parts of aloe, oil, and litharge, and put them in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey; then take some according to your need, mix it with water and honey, and clyster the breast and tighten the orifice; leave it for two hours, then extract it by squeezing; do this many times until the breast is healed and the pus is eliminated; and sometimes one is clystered with ashes of vine wood when this medicine is not available, and it is done thus: collect ashes of vine wood and pour water over them, then strain and clyster with it, until you know that the breast is cleaned; if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then clyster with water and honey in which there is a little litharge powder; or you clyster with honey and wine in which the honey has properties of cleaning and washing, and the wine causes the sore to dry up; and when you have done this and you are confident that the breast is cleaned, then clyster with something that causes flesh to grow in it, and take diaphoretic plaster, and mix it with rose oil and wine; or you clyster with other medicines and ointments of which I have spoken of their properties in the section on ointments; and if the opening of the breast is small, and the cannula of the clyster cannot enter, then enlarge it with a needle, and put in some Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment, as far as it can reach; and if the wound is too large, then cut and leave only the part where the clyster can enter, and if the opening which discharges pus is above, then cover it or lower down.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Because when the bowels are in perfect health, one should not let Char enter; and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish, prepare in such a way that the bowels move to the lowest place they can, for when the bowels are in perfect health, one should not let Char enter, and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish, prepare in such a way: that the bowels move slightly downward, and leave nothing of the bowels; and take consolidating medicines to put over the wound, and they must be on top of a linen drape that covers all the wound; then cover the most forceable place of the breast opening more widely than before, then apply an ointment according to the quantity of the opening, and place it over the opening of the wound to alleviate the bowels, and do not remove the large drape for many days at a time; and that which is over the opening of the breast, remove often to remove the bowels, and know what comes from the bowels, whether it is venom, pus, or enough, or digestible, or indigestible; and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in such a way and you see the nature that emerges over the opening of the wound, then know that the breast is healing, and approaching health; and then loosen it in the morning, or in the middle of the day, and when you loosen the wound, change the other drape, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast milk flows in an unripe state after several days, know that the breast will not produce milk.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons spread over a long time, you should not despair of health, for health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are people whose flesh slowly decays in their wounds, and those who do the opposite; and if indigested food rises from the stomach after many days, know that it does not settle; and if it takes a long time for the stomach to settle and is distant, then apply dry medicines which are moist in substance but dry in virtue, like diaphanous ointment, for it contains a large portion of vitriol, and it is the best medicine; take diaphanous ointment and make it with rose oil, and rose water equal in substance; then cook it and use it; and if you do not have diaphanous ointment ready, take myrrh, aloes, and incense, and grind them into powder over the honey when it is on the fire; then glue a cloth to it, and place it over the stomach, and sometimes one administers Aristologus for a long time, and roots of the celestial lily, which is like wheat flour and centaury; and use simples or compounds: grind them and make them into powder, and put them onto the honey I mentioned, and use it; and if the fistula is slow to heal and is not healed by this treatment, then know that the corruption is deep, and it makes impressions in the bone, or in the hard limbs, or in the tissues; so do the cure of fistulas as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panaris is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the finger or toe, or it may appear elsewhere; and when it becomes infected, and no action is taken, an abscess forms, and it grows and extends to the root of the nail, and sometimes even further; and erosion reaches the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the area around the digit becomes swollen, and the color turns red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have described in the previous section, and the treatment does not help, then you should cut away all the excess tissue that is hanging from the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cauterization is very effective if the bone and nail are healthy; and if the nail begins to grow into the flesh, and the edge starts to blister, then you should place a thread beneath the nail so that it lifts the flesh, and tie it tightly above, and carefully cut away the dead tissue, and apply burning and corrosive medications to remove everything; then treat with ointments until it heals.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it out and draw it out, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal; and if you see that it is corrupted, cut it on both sides of the nail as previously described, then cure it until it heals; and if it is raw and bleeding, and he feels great pain, you must treat him first; then cut the nail of the finger斜 at an angle from above, and be careful not to cut into the flesh under the nail, for the patient would feel great pain; and if this happens, put something over it to soothe the wound.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of a deaf person's hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two joints that grow in some people's hands by chance are sometimes all flesh, and sometimes they have bones, and sometimes nails; and some grow from the root of the joint, and the growth is on some fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those who are born in the head of the jaw do not move, and those who are born at the joint of the jaw may move; the size of the one who is fleshy is slight, in such a way: cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those that grow at the root of the joint are difficult to cure; you must cover them.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For those who are born in the back of the jaw, you should first scrape the round flesh to the bone, then scrape the bone with an appropriate needle, then heal it until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	Joints can be united by birth, or by the joining of a wound, or by a burn, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Then you should scrape that seam so that the jaws fit together according to their natural shapes; then put between two tents or moistened sheets in rose oil, so that they do not stick together; or put between two pieces of subtle plaster, until the jaw is healed, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If adhesion occurs to one of his hands with the palm, correct that adhesion as it should be.
des vils	of the evil
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Wens are large, wrapped tumors full of melancholy superfluities, which come in many parts of the body; and they occur more in legs of those who walk and work and carry things, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should administer to him some purgative medicine, and then the basil drink.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cure with iron is in two ways: one is that you cut and draw out the black blood; the other way is that you open the vein and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The cure with incision is in this way: first heat the leg in very hot water until the large vessels are subtilized, then stretch the leg from above the thigh to the part under the knee; then cut the vein in one place, or two or three places, with a wide incision, then open and draw out the black blood by hand, from one end to the other, as much as the virtue of the medication can tolerate; then tie it off and command that he eat foods mixed with black gall; and begin the evacuation and bleeding again when the veins are full, and repeat the treatment.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The treatment of the disease is as follows: raise the leg of the patient, if there is a lot of hair, then put it in the bath, and warm the leg with hot water until it turns red and the veins swell; and if you do not have a bath, heat it over the fire, and then press the vein from the top to the knee, or in the part below the ankle; then open the skin at the nail, and scrape the vein on each side until it appears when one feels it; and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white cord; then tie it under the vein, so that it is lifted from the skin, and then it can be easily tied at another nail; then make another cut, or several if you need to, then lift it and press it on the toe, then draw and lift it up to the second cut; then pull it out of the cuts one by one until it comes out completely, then tie it; and if you cannot pull and lift it, then insert a strong doubled thread with a needle, tie it and pull it, and insert it under the vein, and turn your hand from side to side until it comes out; and be careful that it does not rip, because if it rips, one cannot pull and lift it, and it brings harm to the patient; and when you have treated it completely, place moist wool soaked in wine and rose oil on the wound site; and cure it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the bone is bent and twisted and enveloped together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must split it crookedly, but do not cover it; and draw it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron with which one splits the bone must be curved, and it must not cut so that it does not split the vein; and it must be a gross curve because if it were thin it would split the vein, but it should be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
de la voinne civile	of a civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is jagged in the legs, in warm parts where herbs or trees do not grow, and in land where there is no moisture; and by chance it grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens from porridge that comes underneath the skin, just as snakes and worms come inside the body, jaggedy between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	If the signs of the beginning of this wound are that a great inflammation comes in the leg, then the location changes, and the wound begins to come out, just as a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the wound opens, you should wrap around it a piece of cloth two and a half yards to three yards long, and tie it, leaving the cloth hanging on the leg, and every time it comes out, wrap it around the cloth again, and if it is too long, cut off part of it, and wrap the rest, but do not cover its root until it all comes out; because if you cover it, it will go back into the flesh, and cause an abscess and pus in the wound, which is bad; therefore, this wound should be treated a little bit at a time until it is fully healed, and nothing remains in the body; sometimes this wound can be as long as five or ten palms, one man came to me whose was ten palms long, when you cover it, pierce the tip or opening with a needle all the way to the bottom so that everything comes out, then empty the matter inside, and administer healing medicines on subsequent days, then treat it like any other abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes this vein bleeds profusely, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot, or at the foot itself, and it gushes out copiously, and from which it sprinkles blood; treat it therefore as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that live between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called "buef" in our land because it often affects oxen. It is caused by a small worm that lives between the skin and flesh, moving throughout the body, ascending and descending, until it breaks out of the skin wherever it goes, and it sprinkles blood; and it is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms, snakes, earthworms, and roundworms live in the belly. One fears its malice because when it moves through the body and ascends to the head, it can enter and destroy the eye; this often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being cured and drawn out, one cannot help but wince when it goes: so therefore you must tie the area above and below with a strong string tightly, then press on it and draw it out forcefully; and if the pus is deep in the flesh, and you do not draw it out, cauterize it with fire until it comes out; and the greatest harm that it does is that it runs into the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming near the eye, then tightly constrict under it the eyelid, then press on it and draw it out forcefully; and one should use the cleansing of the body with solutive medicines to remove bad humors, and a diet of warming foods to promote suppuration.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of pain that comes from flatulence
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called 'wind-pain' in our language, and it is a pain that afflicts certain members, then moves from member to member; I saw what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman and she uncovered her arm and I saw a small swelling on the vein of her elbow; and then soon after, I saw it rise up her shoulder like a worm, more quickly than anything, as bright as silver when it moves from one place to another; the pain left that spot and settled in her shoulder, and then a little while later spread throughout her body, until it reached her other arm; then she told me she felt it circulating around her body, just as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was very surprised how it moved from limb to limb like that, because I had never seen this disease progress in that way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Nevertheless, I have seen many people whose pain moved from one place to another, but I have not seen it as clearly as in this woman; and I believed that it was because women's bodies are drier, and their veins are more exposed, and thus the wind finds an easy passage; but it does not appear in those who are plump and have moist skin and relaxed veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see this disease being treated and the patient feels the pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then ligature above and below tightly, and then press on it until that windiness forced out of its place; and cauterize the spot; and if you do not see it yourself, then treat by those who dislodge windiness, such as foul pills, and serapin pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearance and according to the part of the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The varieties of them are that there are some with large points, and small, and hooked, and blunt; and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those with pieces; and one which breaks in any member breaks according to two ways: either in a principal member it breaks, such as brain, heart, liver, lung, kidney, intestine, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it therefore occurs in any part of these limbs and the sign of death that I will tell you about later becomes apparent to you: then you should take care to extract this arrow, for death comes afterwards in various ways; and when this bad sign does not appear to you at all, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then pull it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of death when the arrow pierces the bone and hits the brain, is when there is bleeding and pus coming from the nose or ears, and also swelling and redness in these parts, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of blood; and perhaps a discharge from the nose or ears; and sometimes they lose their speech and voice; and from the wound there is white moisture that resembles pus, and it seeps out like the breath of a fire, and there is also a bruise-like discoloration around the wound; and if this sign becomes apparent to you, then stop the treatment and pull out the arrow if it is not already out.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The signs of a seizure when it occurs in the heart are that it is near the left breast, and feels as though it were pierced by a hard object, not hollow; and sometimes the seizure is silent like the pulse, and black blood flows, and there is a chill and cold sweat, and a fainting: then know without doubt that death approaches.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow that never leaves the lung is that without pain foam comes from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes heavily and seeks the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow hits in the covering of the foot, it is between the small ribs; and there is great swelling and great pain and breathing; and all the limbs move from the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrow hits the stomach, perhaps something undigested will jump out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow hits the belly, and nothing comes out of the bowel but feces, then there is no hope for a cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow hits the bladder, and urine comes out and escapes, and the patient feels great pain, know that this wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and armpit and spine of the back and hip and thigh and leg, and similar limbs, are safe according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or artery and is not venomous, as I will tell you so that you can do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	There was once a man who had a seizure in the jaw, and it fell into the roots of his teeth; I treated it by stretching it from under the ear fat, and he recovered without loss of consciousness.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And on a boy there was a seizure that fell into the fat of the eye under the paper under the lower jaw; and the seizure was drawn back, and he could only reach it with the tip towards the body, and the seizure was as big as a Turkish arrowhead, all iron-hard without ears; the boy recovered, and no bad accidents happened to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And I drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow to the ears; I lanced the abscesses, and I extracted it gently, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I extracted an arrow from a man's home, which was lodged in his belly, and I thought he would die; and after thirty days had passed, his condition did not improve; so I cut into the arrow, and cauterized it, and pulled it out, and he had no bad outcome.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a man whom an arrow has pierced in the back, and the wound is sewn up on top of it; and the arrow remains inside him, and his natural functions remain unchanged, and he finds no harm in any of his natural actions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And I saw another man whom an arrow had hit in the face, and his wound was sewn up; and he remained like that without experiencing great pain; and many other similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And drew an arrow at the home of the princes the king, who had a toothache in his jaw, and was slightly declining to the right side; and the arrow was all swollen I was called to the cure after three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I wanted to probe it with a very thin instrument, and I didn't feel anything; but he felt piercing and pain under his right ear.Je le queris alerge les deux oreilles et la gueule, et il le voudroit point faire; car il estoit sain home.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I placed a healing and digestive poultice on the site to reduce swelling; and I saw the tip of the arrow.Et si me prier, que je le traisse; et je ne voulus point faire, por ceu qu’il estoit sain home, si ne fu pour alerger les oreilles et la gueule.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the poultice again after a few days, and the wound healed again, but the patient felt the arrow in his jaw for a long time; he told me about it.Et si me demanda se li seroien venuz as oreilles, car il sentoit l’esgout de la saiette dedens ses oreilles et sa gueule.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it was open and I could feel the head of the arrow which was lodged there; then I treated the wound with the medicine until the head of the arrow became visible; the wound healed well within four months, and then I lanced it, probing with tweezers from both sides but unable to extract anything; so I continued to probe and manipulate with instruments until one day I was able to grasp it with specially made tweezers, as described in this chapter, and I removed the arrowhead and healed the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And I saw that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored; so I restored it, closed the wound, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Here I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you place your treatment on what I do not say, for books cannot encompass everything; but wise masters reason well on very small things, and on what is present and lacking to them, they devise new works and new instruments, in the descent of strange things that come to this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows grow from the members where they are stuck in two ways: either by the place where they enter or by another part; and those that go out by the place where they entered are arrows entering into fleshy parts, and sometimes they go out now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not go out now, then leave it as long as the flesh around it becomes putrid and the passageway is cleared; and also, if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, then leave it for several days, and move it every day; and then it will come out, and if it does not, then pierce through to the very tip of a subtle forest, as long as the passages around it are widened, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the skull, and penetrates one of the ventricles of the brain, and any of the symptoms I have mentioned appear in the patient: then do not extract it, but let it be until it becomes even with some part of the skin, for if the arrow reaches the brain, that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is lodged only in the bone and does not reach the brain, and the patient remains for several days without any bad symptoms, then treat it by extraction.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is stuck deeply and cannot be removed, then administer cauterization around it, as I have told you; then clean the wound until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is lodged deeply in the body so that it cannot be seen, then probe it throughout; and if you feel it, extract it with an appropriate instrument; and if because of the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, there is no bone, nerve, or vein in the way, then cut around the wound to make it larger; and if there are barbs on the arrow that hold it in place, remove the shaft as far as you can, and then bend or twist the barbs of the arrow so that you can extract it; be careful not to break the arrow as you pull it out.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot remove it in one go, then leave it until the flesh around it is swollen, and then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the flow of blood makes it contrary, then administer what we have said about the treatment in its chapter; and beware of incision into the nerve and of opening a vein, and put oil as you are able to move the arrow without peril, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and put the patient according to how he was when the arrow hit him, for that is the greatest aid there is, and if you cannot, then put it according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Arrows that come from another direction, or where something is sticking out of them, or the skin is swollen in that area, if one can see it or feel it apparently: cut above it, as far as the tweezers can grab it, and then pull it out; if it won't come out just yet.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is caught in the bone, then rotate your hand rapidly, so that it goes into the bone and widens the opening, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, then leave it for now and try again to extract it; and if there is a fragment of the arrow inside, then insert the instrument as far as the shaft; and if the shaft is broken, and you see that administration of the instrument is possible, then administer the instrument with its point entering in so as to облегчить extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow has touched, then you must cut all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, then cure the wound as it should be.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow pierces the buttock or thigh or belly or bladder or side, and it is close to the surface, and you can cut around it, then do so; but be careful not to cut into the vein and nerve, and then pull out the arrow, and then stitch up the wound, if necessary; and cure it until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of tweezers used to treat arrows are similar to an owl's beak, and here is the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	There are many types: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrowhead is like that of a bird's feather, to push against the tip of the arrow, just as it is shaped:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of tweezers to pull and to check if it is there:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common body veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are 31 veins that can be used for bleeding, and they have 16 openings in the head: two just behind the ears, called "ear-veins"; and the two arteries in the temples that are visible; and two veins in the corners of the eyes, called "sight-veins"; and the vein in the middle of the forehead; and the vein at the base of the nose; and the two windpipes that are in the neck; and the two veins on the upper lip, which are called "upper-lip veins"; and the two veins underneath the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	Veins, which are commonly used for healing, are V in each arm: one is the cephalic vein, located on the left side of the chest, and the common people call it 'vein of the head'; and the middle one is called 'fast', composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and the common people call it 'vein of the heart'; and the basilic vein is on the right side of the chest, and the common people call it 'vein of the belly', and it is above the cubital fossa, and it is the one used for healing, which opens clearly above the elbow.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the salvator vein is the one between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has II branches; and in the leg there are III veins: one is below the bend of the left-side pocket, and the second sophene which is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein called  'nesse', which is at the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg there are III veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The bleeding of the veins that are behind the ears is helped by old catarrhs and by emigration; and the qualities of the bleedings, as I told you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then stretch the patient's neck to a vise, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending on the head; then press them to your finger, and where you feel the pulse under your finger, sign with ink; then take the lance, and pierce it under the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand to the entire vein upstream, and pierce both the skin and the vein well with two thrusts, and make the blood come out until you see it; then stretch and tie it, so that it is healed; and I have already spoken of the incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The bleeding of the two arteries in the temples, if it helps to cure old blindness and blindness due to cataracts, and tears in the eyes, and the body of ague in the eyes; and the quality of the bleeding is as I said: and that the patient stretches his neck so that the two veins appear clearly; and feel the pulse under your finger, and then sign with your finger; then lift the vein above your finger to the top, and insert the needle underneath, and lift the vein above, and cup it, as you have done in the other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need; then release the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it; and then tie it firmly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of their binding and extraction, at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The bleeding of the vein in the forehead is as effective as the bleeding of the cephalic vein for old diseases of the face, and for migraines and redness; and its quality is such that the patient turns his neck until the vein appears; then take the instrument called a "fosseur", whose form is as follows:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the tip on the vein and press up with your hand or something else, and let the blood issue according to the amount you see; then loosen the neck of the patient, and tie the vein until it is healed, and sometimes the operation is done with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Nevertheless, it is not right that the flames be too sharp; and the sick person should not move about, because the bone is close by, and perhaps the flames will break when they are thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The bleeding of the two veins that are in the temples helps with earaches and eye pains, and with redness and migraines; and the qualities of their bleeding are such that the patient turns his neck by twisting some part of it, as before; then bleed him, and let the bleeding be through the vein, a little from the long flame a little wide, for there is no flesh there.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, by chance they may break; then make an incision to draw blood, as much as you need, and then bind it on a cotton pad, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The vein-bleeding for the nose is good for aguishness and for sudden madness and for face-sickness, such as мигрень and redness that comes in the face, and also when it is old; and the quality of the bleeding is that the patient holds his neck, then pulls on his nose with his left hand, takes a long, thin flame, and inserts it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well otherwise, and the blood will now begin to flow; do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then ligate it for one night, for it is quickly restored. And this is the shape of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The bleeding of the two veins helps with swelling in the throat, and with the beginning of toothache, and with many illnesses, and with empyema, and with corrosion, and with herpes, and with estiomata; and the quality of the bleeding is that the patient holds his neck from side to side, as we have said; and let the master stand above the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a chair, then open the vein of the arm widely for a little, then draw the blood gently, or as much as is needed; then do the same in the other vein, then loosen the ligature, and gently pinch both veins so that the patient does not choke; and let him stay until the morning, so that the wound can heal.
de la sainie des leivres	of bleeding from the gums
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The bleeding of the veins in the lips helps with sores in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and splitting of the lips, and pain in the teeth and gums.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of bleeding is to have the patient sit before you and stretch his neck as I said; then turn up the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, which can be distinguished by their being black, and by there being around them fine black veins: pinch both, and if you do not know them, and are in doubt, then pinch the largest of each side, and likewise do the same with the two veins above and below, for it is the same technique.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of bleeding under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The bleeding of veins that are beneath the tongue is helped after the bleeding of the cephalic vein; it is due to constriction of the throat, and illnesses of the eye, and illnesses of the mouth; the quality of the bleeder is such that the patient should sit between your hands facing the sun, and lift up his tongue, and look underneath on each side for a black vein: treat both, and do not go too deep, because beneath them are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the neck from which one commonly bleeds are bled in two ways: either with a wide, pointed mirtin twig, or with a thin olive-wood skewer, and it is called 'anesil'; they are wide and thin according to the width and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame of myrtle is highly renowned, and it is wide as you can see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the flat veins that contain thick and apparent blood, and which contain thick and troubled blood; this is the shape of the olive-wood skewer:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more pointed and subtle, used for bleeding veins that are fine and contain subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps illnesses that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the abdomen; and the surgeon must bleed it cleanly, and bandage the artery underneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it pierces the artery, and blood flows out, then it must be stopped as I have said; and the flame should not be gripped, but cut off like a candle.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilic does not open obviously, then you must stretch it and change to another; or you can bleed in its place through the arm: it will open obviously; and grip the flame at the end, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you want to find the location for bleeding, then you must stretch the arm and feel for the pulse; then mark the spot, and then tie the arm, and pierce the vein at the end of the flame, and be careful not to pierce the artery when you see it pulsing, for that is the artery: avoid it therefore.Et se li sangs estainche, et tu vees que il ne vout point, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et tu cope l’artere sus la voinne, et puis tu saine dou flaime; ou tu quieres rain d’en la voinne, ou tu saine en leu de li, car c’est li meins sainable.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it rising upward like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that this is the blood of an artery: therefore hasten, and place your finger over it for a long time, then remove your finger if the blood stops, as often happens; tie the arm and leave it thus, and do not move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood is not staunched and he bleeds and medicine is not present, then cut the artery if it is open, for that is where the blood comes from; and staunch the blood.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a piece of fir-bark, and split it, and take one half and tie it on well until the next day; if the bleeding stops, that is good; if not, then stop it with a cautery, as we have said, using powders to stop bleeding; and the stopping of bleeding is not harmful in various conditions because of the small size of the wound, and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The bleeding of the vein in the middle helps it to draw blood from both above and below, because it is composed of basil and cedar, as we have said; and the surgeon must be careful not to pierce the nerve underneath, and if he pierces too deeply, and finds the nerve, it will swell and become injured, and may never heal; and this nerve often appears, and if in some men it does not appear because of its subtlety, then you must stop it with an instrument; and avoid the nerve as best you can.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if it has a vein between the two nerves, they cut it open.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The vein of the cephalic helps, as it draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes; and one should bleed with a flame of olive oil or a flame of myrrh, for it is the safest of all veins, for there are no nerves or arteries beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Nevertheless, one should seek the lightest vein, and not worry if one misses the first time, and try again; and perhaps the site will swell in some people if one misses the first time, but it will not hurt.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the bleeding depends on your thought process.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you should know about bleeding is that it is only done to maintain health and prevent diseases; and bleeding should be done in one of the three veins: the cephalic, the superficial temporal, and the basilic; and one should bleed at the beginning of lent, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of digestion are apparent; and one should bleed on the first or third day, after two or three hours of the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The bleeding that is administered for illnesses has no set time, but when there is a need during the day or night, at all hours and at all times; and children should not be bled until they are 14 years old, nor women carrying a fetus beyond the fourth month until the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should the very elderly who have passed 60 years be bled.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when one wishes to bleed, in any manner, they should first cleanse the intestines with a gentle clyster if they have retained much waste, so that the veins are not drawn from the intestines by harmful superfluities damaging the principal limbs; nor should one bleed those who are too full from eating meat, or who are drunk, as long as they remain so, nor the very elderly, nor those suffering from dropsy; and one should not bleed after a colic attack, vomiting, diarrhea, and excessive sexual activity in women, nor from exertion, watching, fasting, and what weakens the body, either through arms or the rest of the body; then subtly draw out the humors if the blood is thick, through food and drink and medicine if you have the skill; then enter a bath, if nothing prevents it, to thin the blood, and bleed from the vein around the wrist, as we have said; and guard against exertion that day, and from pain, and excess, and similar things; and be calm and cheerful, and let the person bleeding be higher than the one being bled, and rub the arm two or three times, then tighten the ligature gently, for if it is too tight or too loose, it cannot draw the blood; then rub the site with the hand two or three times until the veins swell and can be felt; then moisten the needle with a little old oil, then press their thumb of their left hand against the vein below where they wish to bleed, so that the vein does not slip away from the needle.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flow like cords in the body, and some are filled with wind, so that when one applies a flame, it retreats from the flame and cannot open the vein; and thus one finds these. And if one opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, for which reason the surgeon must be skilled in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein works the first time, that is good; if not, do it again a little lower down on that spot or higher up, if the vein is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the arm is swollen and the patient is in fear, if one leaves it for a day or two and does not bind the arm: perhaps a cold abscess will develop; do not enter the bath, then restart the bleeding if she wishes; and if the opening is small, cut the skin around the vein subtly and gently, and if you doubt that enough blood will flow as you wish, then apply the flame directly to that opening; and work quickly, so that the arm is swollen; for this happens many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the place swelling, do not re-open the wound, and put a little linseed oil on it, for it lightens the body of blood, and in this place the oil is turned into liniment; and thus administer liniment to every wound that you open veins, to stop the flow of blood; and it does the same when applied to триачель and bowels, when it is put on the spot; it gently draws out the blood and disperses it when it is too abundant.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if a large abscess comes, which often happens, especially when it is not bled before the opening of the vein is small, you must act quickly and put a sponge soaked in warm water and salt on the spot and hold it for an hour; and you must do this after the flow of blood from the vein has stopped, and if a blackness or greenness remains in the spot after a few days, it does no harm; and if you see any swelling, put something made from aloe or myrrh reduced to juice, ointment, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there is an abscess and swelling at the exit of the urethra; therefore place your hand upon it, and if you feel the spot soft to the touch under pressure, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore avoid putting anything of what we have said upon it, for perhaps it will go away without any artery being involved; but make a dry plaster to harden the spot, then treat the wound with other treatments until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to its quantity and the strength of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for one who is full and swollen, and needs bloodletting, that they make a larger wound, and the flames should be wide; and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and they should bleed little and often, and one should bleed them by cutting across, not piercing; and this method of bleeding is safe from blood loss and nerve damage, and it is better than bleeding from a long or wide wound.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for one whose body needs bleeding, it is good to give them wet bread in pomegranate juice; if they are hot-tempered, bleed them three or four times. And if of a cold complexion, eat moist bread before bleeding, dipped in spiced honey syrup, or in aromatic honey with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and sweet-smelling syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints during bleeding, after losing a lot of blood, then he should drink warm broth and fragrant syrup, and use other things that we have mentioned in the chapter on syncope, for opening the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to empty his arm and bleed again, it is necessary, when he is weakened by a large bleed, that he bleeds little by little according to the amount of his continued strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wants to open their arm after the first bleeding, and they have a strong body, then heal for .7 hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to bleed elsewhere, then they should bleed on the second day or the third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is a lot of blood inside the body that has been heated, and it causes fever; so you must draw off a large quantity, and widen the hole until it bleeds freely; then you should check all the conditions of bleeding, and put your hand on his pulse while he bleeds, so that death does not come to the part where the vein is, and this happens many times when the bloodletting is négligent. And if when you see the arm loosening and the blood coming out a second time, and the hole is closed, you must not press directly on it; nor if it is crooked, should he stretch his arm forcefully, for that would be bad. Instead, let it bleed until it is finished bleeding for the second time, then touch the tip of the wound with a flame, so that the congealed blood at the opening of the vein melts away, and apply a little salt in water, and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is reduced.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to let blood a second time, then bleed in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The veins in the arm are healthy in the area of the vein in the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of bleeding is for the patient to put his hand in warm water until the vein turns red; then let it be tied loosely so that the vein appears well, and then bleed immediately through the middle, not through the width or length; and let the incision be wide, and let the bleeding be done close to the joint of the hand, and if it cannot come out, put the hand in warm water again, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough; and if it is in winter, do not re-immerse the hand in warm water, because it is more immersed in winter than in summer; and bleeding from this vein is safer than all other veins, for there are no arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	Bleeding from the back of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it is done: stretch out the hand and put it in warm water until the vein swells; if you can see it, then bleed through the middle, and if you close it all the way around, it will do no harm; and do not go too deep, because the nerves are completely naked under the skin, and then put the hand back in warm water if the blood is congealed in the wound and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have stopped the bleeding as much as necessary, then put oil and silk on the wound to heal quickly, and do this for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The bleeding in the left hand is beneficial for the disease of the mouse, and do everything just as I told you about the right hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The salve of the sophia is good for all diseases that are under the body, such as diseases of the stomach, and retention of fluids, and diseases of the kidneys, and the buttocks and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of its salve are such that the patient puts it in hot water and rubs it on the vein until it pops out, and then he applies it to the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, and up the foot, they should move a lot of fluids; therefore treat it either at the largest vein or at the ankle, whichever moves more.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you cut it at the foot, then be careful of the nerves underneath, and cut it across as well as up and down; and let the flames go out.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water, and let the vein bleed well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the salve fails the first time, do it again the second time, for the site is salty; do not be afraid of nerves as we have said, and likewise do with the sophia on the other foot similarly.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The location of the sciatic vein is at the ankle bone, and its pulsation extends to the pain in the hip, when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of his healing is that the patient enters the bath, and twists the ankle three times upwards, for otherwise the vein will not open; and if it opens, then heal it in every way you can, and by crossing over; and it is better that you cup it, for the site is safe, and it is very relaxing for many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not drain it, then heal any vein that opens on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and be careful of the nerves; and make the blood flow until you see enough, and then loosen the ligature and put on cotton and tighten it; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	Of cupping
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Suction cups are made of horn, or bronze, or glass; and suction is performed in two ways: by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this venesection which is done by burning is done in two ways: with or without fire; and venesection which is done by burning and by bloodletting is done in 14 places of the body, of which one is on the top of the head; and the other is in the neck; and two others are on either side of the neck; and the cupping is under the chin; and the cupping is on the shoulders; and the cupping is on the hips; and the cupping is on the buttocks; and the cupping is on the thighs; and the cupping is on the calves; and the cupping is on the ankles; and venesection does not treat blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and because of this it does not weaken at all, as is done with bloodletting; and it should not be administered, neither with fire nor without fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if it is necessary to bleed due to illness or habit, we should do so at the beginning or end of the month, and in all seasons; for there are some who, when they need to bleed, experience a heavy head, and some who become congested and red in the face, head, and neck, and darken their eyes; and some who have a drop of blood in their mouth, and swell their tongue, and taste blood; and there are those who faint, and see blackness and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially if it occurs during the night, we instruct them to drink a medicine after three hours.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The bleeding of the nose helps with headaches ... that come from the eyes, and it must not be after the evacuation of the whole body; and this bleeding is in place of the cephalic bleeding, and it must not be used by those of a cold complexion, or who have catarrh, for it does them great harm; and because of this the elderly should not use it, nor those with cold diseases of the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often heal from it become oblate, and because of this, the cupping glasses should be placed a little lower down due to the risk of oblateness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	Ventilation in the neck is located at the junction of the head and basilic vein, and for this reason it helps with constriction of the feet, and with fissures in the channels of the lungs, and with constipation and distension; and one should not push on it too much, because if held too firmly it can cause damage to the oesophagus, stomach, and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventilation holes at the back of the neck help with headaches and migraines, and strangulation, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and are located where the basilic vein opens; and you must instruct the surgeon to hold his hand while inserting, so that he does not press on the artery and cause a gushing of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	Ventilation below the chin is good for mouth diseases, and gum corruption, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; it is in the location of the veins of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Ventilation of the armpits is good for a disease that comes from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The ventilation holes in the armpits are like three veins in the arm, as they draw blood from these large vessels; and instruct the surgeon not to pierce too deeply, because under the skin there are nerves and arteries.Li ventosations dou poing atrait sanc des bras et des coutes; li sainors covient qu’il les fasse a la fin de l’operation, qu’il ne fiet avant, car il est leus des ners qui vont a li membres.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping glass that is placed on the hip is good for hemorrhoids and diseases underneath; and the cupping glass should be large and made of copper, which it needs to draw well; and by chance, if it were delicate, it would break and make great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	Cupping on the legs heal very well, for they draw blood from throughout the body, and are effective for long-standing pains in the kidneys, and the bladder, and for hernia; and they bring relief to swelling in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying the cupping glass is to first apply it empty, and suck gently, and place it firmly, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the area red and swollen, and the color of blood appears; then release, and re-apply the cups, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are those with thin skin and clear pores: thus one should only pierce once, and make wide wounds, and a little deep; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, one should pierce twice: the first time to subtilize the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very thick, one should pierce a third time; and when we want to draw blood a little at a time, we only pierce once.Et se li sans est maigre, et les porez clers, si covient ferir tres foiz: car il ne peut sortir tout le gros sans que la voie ne soit subtiliée par traison du sang maigre.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want a lot of blood, we should bleed often; and if the blood is thick, pierce it with a needle, and heat the tip so that the veins are pierced suddenly, and it is appropriate for those who have tough, hard skin and tight pores to anoint the spots where the cupping glasses will be placed with an aperitif and dissolutive oil: if it is in the summer, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if it is in winter, use watercress oil, or lily, or chamomile, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the swelling is large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsam, or of fennel, and similar oils.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if one is being bled from tender skin and large pores, then no oil should be used, but it should be washed after cupping with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or pumpkin water, or porcelain water, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have a lot of moisture should get up from garlic, or myrrh water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large swellings should rise from old wine, or from water of suckling, or from the decoction of fennel or camomile, or from other such things; and one must not bleed with a cupping-glass before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and one must not sleep after bloodletting, and one must be careful when one is to be bled and when one has been bled.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And beware if the person being bled is choleric, and if the blood is too thin and inflamed; one must eat cool things, like pomegranates and endive and lettuce with garlic, and similar things; and drink little, and eat charred food from a pot, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those with a cool complexion should drink honey syrup, and moderate old wine, and eat moist food, and drink little, and eat small birds and pigeons; and on the day one is bled, one should drink more than one eats; and one should give some men treacle or muscate before bloodletting, or afterwards, to comfort the principal members; and the blood should be subdued, but those who are hot-tempered should not drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The cupping glasses that are used for bleeding are those that are placed on the liver, and on the mumps, and on the gout, and on the belly and the buttocks, and the thighs, and the hips; because these members do not endure being hurt on the eyes, and it is not done except to draw blood from one member to another, as we put them on the breasts when the nipples are healthy; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we place cupping glasses on the belly and on the buttocks to reduce the member; and it removes pain when there is inflammation or stone, or by its attractive power it removes the inflammation, or drives out the stone from its place; and thus it does when one puts it on the liver and on the mumps when there is retained flatulence, and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water, as in diseases of the pleurisy, and in such a way one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the cupping glass administered by fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it is two digits wide and a half palm deep, and on the side around the middle there is a small hole, just big enough to push through a needle, and it should be made of bronze, smooth in front so that it does not bleed the patient when placed on the limb; and in the middle there is a crossbar of bronze or iron, for holding a candle, and they are both large and small according to the illnesses and ages of those who use them; for the ventouses of children are different from those of the old, and of the thin from the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one should thus place this ventouse on the limb: take the candle of wax or the liniment, and put it inside the ventouse through the crossbar, so that the flame is at the bottom of the ventouse and does not burn the patient; then place it on the limb, and your fingers should be over the hole we mentioned, so that when you wish, the vapor will go, and one removes the ventouse; then take the liniment as before, and repeat often if needed.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the ventouse which is administered for pleurisy, all types of aiguë, there is no tube or aperture, and it is not removed until it is filled with water, and is placed on the affected member by itself. And that is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Leeches are not removed until they are in soft, clean water without any dirt, and they are placed on members where you cannot place ventouses due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; and on bare flesh, such as toes or fingers, and others; and the quality of their use is that when you find leeches that are in soft, clean water without dirt, you take them; and put them in a bowl of soft water until they are familiar with it, and have nothing in their bellies; and then they should be bled from a vein and with a ventouse, then rub the affected member until it is red, and place the leeches on top of it; and when they are full and start to bite, if there is a place where one can place a ventouse, one should do so, for that helps a lot.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, then raise the affected area above the level of the heart, and then above water, very well, and then compress it; and if the bite marks are too low on the body, moisten a linen cloth in cold water, and place it over the bite until the swelling is reduced; and if the bites are numerous, apply powdered vitriol, or gall, and similar substances, until the swelling is reduced; or place half a handful of peeled peas over the bite, and leave them there until they warm up to the bite, and it will stop bleeding immediately; and if you need more, take more leeches.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	If the leeches will not attach, then rub the bite with fresh blood, or prick the area with a needle until blood comes out, and then apply them, and as soon as they taste the blood, they will attach; and when you see that they are excreting, then sprinkle powdered aloe and salt, or ash, over them, and they will stop now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and is a cure for fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that the foolish people wonder at this chapter, for they have never seen it in any of the ancient books nor read any letter in it; and because of this, knowledge is strange in our land, for I have never found any good in it; and I know nothing about it, except through the knowledge of the ancient books, in which I have studied so much that I have gained knowledge, and by experience and the habit of my life. And I have described to you in this chapter what is contained in it, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I have done in the two chapters above.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we must say in the prologue of this book the subjects of the discussion and the chapters in which the sage sets his understanding, and dwells on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or crushing occurs in someone, you should hurry to heal the patient from one side and another if nothing else stops it, such as weakness of the body, or old age, or youth; or if the weather is not very hot or too cold; and eat cool foods, that is, cool meat, and deer and goat meat, and do not drink any wine, nor consume any fatty foods, and do not fill yourself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have a doubt about a hot abscess or swelling of matter in the limb; then return the patient to their previous way of life.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, one must feed the patient foods that promote swelling and stickiness, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, eggs, and offal, and fresh fish, and wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with this swelling the bones will close up and heal more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well healed or joined according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of young children; but have no concern, reset the broken bone with the large tendons that stretch and join the limb together, so that it enforces it as it was before; and do not stop completely from his work, and for this reason one should eat plenty of meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And you should know that there are various types of fractures in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways of fracturing.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another in grinding, as with the tip of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with a wound, and a break all over a small split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And in each manner, there is its own skill and proper instrument in the restoration, according to what the memory comes into its place; and it is known that there is a fracture of the bone by the fact that the area is twisted, and appears well by displacement, and sounds on pressure with the hand; and when there is no twisting or pain on touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture; but there can be twisting, or splitting, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You should not move it by hand, but rather apply the remedies that follow, and then hold it firmly in place.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the fracture which goes into the bone, and are the two parts separated, they must now be set even, so that the abscesses heal; and if hot abscesses come, then let it rest for a day, until the abscess is relieved; then set it even with the movements you can make easily and without pain, and know that the restoration of this one is easier than the restoration of the one who has pieces; then bind it as it should be afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, and it is in two parts, whether it is arm or leg, or a hand, if it is a small member, or two tendons, or one tendon and a hand; and set the member according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the member are separated, they are pulled by all means into their places with the movements you can make easily and without pain, and be careful that your work does not cause injury or pain to the patient; and join the two ends of the bone well according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And you can feel it with your hand if it seems to you that it is not right: then dress it nicely, and do not pull or press too hard as those who cause hot abscesses and contraction in the limb by their work, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the member is at its worst, then treat the patient carefully so that he does not move it, whether waking or sleeping, turning or otherwise; and take care that the member is so secure that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, it is not at its worst, and it must be put in such a position that he feels no pain; and take care that it is set straight, so that no crookedness comes to it when it is restored; and the quality of the broken member is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken members vary in smallness and greatness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small members, such as arms and fingers and similar: these should be wrapped with soft, fine linen; and for larger ones, such as thigh and leg, use a wide, firm bandage, as the wide bandages embrace the whole large member and constrict it equally all around, so that there is no gap; then wind light-weight bandages around three or four times according to the member, and press your hand gently on all the bandage, then go above the fracture and constrict less, so that the fracture is drawn out a little; then soften the bandage little by little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy area, then take another bandage and wrap it directly over the broken area; then return to the part below the fracture and constrict gently, not too tightly or too loosely, as we said in the first hour above; then place bandages of linen or cloth between the bandages so that they are all even, then tie a bandage over everything, and then apply your splints well made over it, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, place a hot poultice to soothe the abscess and reduce the swelling, leaving it for several days; then apply a compress made from half a length of a large cane, cut to bleed, or from palm fronds, shaped in this manner:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	but the compress that is placed over the dislocation should be a little larger and wider than the others; and it should be as long as necessary for the limb, whether small or large; then apply pressure on the compresses as you did at first, and tie a thread over it appropriately, as in the first instance over the dislocation; the tighter it is, the better; and the thread should be medium thickness, not too thin or too thick, and made of soft flax. For if the thread is thick, as I have seen fools do, tying their bandages with twisted cords, this is a great error, for the bandage cannot be equal if it is too fine, and there should not be less than two fingers' width between each compress.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is wounded in the head after the stretching of his legs while healthy, then place under them linen pads or other soft cloth so that he does not get hurt.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a fracture, and the bone is broken, I will describe the treatment for this later.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not good to stretch all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	Because when the member is swollen, one should not put splints on it until after five or seven days, or more depending on how confident you are that a hot abscess will burst; and here is the method of ancient poultices to restore breaks, dislocations, and twists: take flour that is kept in the walls of the mill and mix it with beaten eggs, and put this preparation - neither too thin nor too thick - and use it. This is the common way of restoring a break in many ways, especially in women and small children, because it is not too loose or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way of plaster restoring the fracture and dislocation and twist: take 3 barley and ladani and enule and asafetida and gum arabic and mastic, each 10; myrrh and aloes, each 5; alechil 8; and make powder of them, and mix it with egg-abundance; if the complexion of the man is hot, then use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is useful to many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another poultice method that works for twists: take mastic and myrrh, each 10 grams; aloe and aloeswood, each 7 grams; acacia gum 6 grams; Armenian bole 10 grams, and grind well, and mix with water or beaten eggs, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method of plaster for joints and bones dislocated from their places, which alleviates pain, reduces swelling, and promotes healing: take new lamb's wool, moisten it in arsole and oil, and apply it to the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not restore, but it is good for soothing hot abscesses and removing pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way of making a plaster that restores broken bones: take dry fig leaves and ground ivy leaves, crush them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of plaster for healing bone fractures and reducing the swelling of an abscess: take new lamb's wool, moisten it in arsole and oil, and apply it to the affected area. It also helps to restore broken bones and reduce the size of an abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take the root of comfrey, chamomile, violet flowers, and wheat flour, one part each; grind and cook them in wine. If the member is hot, cook the plaster with moist coriander water or water to cool it, then apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method of emplastri more forceful than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take the roots of viscaria, and flax seed, fennel, melilot, and Sansevieria, and flowers of violets and camomile; of each take one part. Crush and cook with salt water or fresh water or wine, according to the heat of the member and its condition.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocrates says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken member to restore it other than a cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems according to Galen that one must put on the broken member, to restore, dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of plaster that is good for injury and pain: take mugwort and human hair cut short, or bird feathers, and bee's wax, and mix them together, and crush them, and make a plaster from it and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then loosen it a little after, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor does the bone move out of its place; if not, loosen it by hand for several days. And if pain comes to the site, or itching, without rest or swelling, hurry up and loosen it, and remove the emplastri immediately; then take a light cloth and sponge of sea sponge, moisten in water, and lay on the site until the itching stops and the pain is appeased; then let the member rest for an hour, then place a layer of dry linen, moistened with water or rose oil, and tie it onto a nut, so that you are sure of hot abscesses; and rest the inflammation of the member, and remove the pain, then restart the subtle incision, and a little emplastri, and do not tighten it as much as before; and subtly until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, and you need ointment and binding, then do it again, just as you did before.Et se il n’est pas sanez, et il ne te veult bien estraindre, si covient qu’il soit osté dou membre et mis en autrui lieu, et li membre ben liien et ben reposé.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if nothing of what we have said comes to the limb, do not dislocate it until three, four, five, or seven days have passed; and sometimes leave it for twenty days, depending on what one sees, as long as the fracture is healing and the bone is approaching the flesh above; then restrain it more than before, and increase his food, as I said earlier. And if you see the site drying out more than necessary, know that no nourishment can come to it; therefore, wet it with warm water every time you dislocate it, and do this every third day, and loosen the bandage a little; through this work, nourishment comes to the limb, and quickly corrects what the foolish healers do, who restore the limb crookedly: this is bad practice, and I see nothing in it but tedium and doing it properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various kinds of fractures:
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many types of fractures, with diverse appearances and distinct causes. Some fractures are caused by the impact of a sword, breaking the bone all the way to the membrane below the bone, as with an axe or a pole; this type of fracture is called a 'haunch-fracture'.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword cuts the bone without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound from these two types of fractures is large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a blow with a bladed weapon, or a split or from the collarbone, or from falling on stone, or from other similar causes.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a broken bone piercing through to the membrane below the bone, or on top of the bone, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the fracture is in the bone as thin as a hair, and the crack is small, then this type of fracture is called 'capillary'; and if the fracture is caused by hitting with stone, or by falling, or by similar actions, and the bone piece goes inside, and the site is smooth like the work of blacksmiths when they hit the anvils; then it is inside the stone.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	This happens more often in people who have moist bones in their heads, like children's skulls; and this happens with all types of fractures where small pieces are separated like tiles; I will speak about them in their own section.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we shall know all kinds of fractures through examination, and through the corruption that is upon them, and through the foulness that is upon them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair is known when one has uncovered the bone and rubbed it, if the fracture appears black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, be wary of the signs of illness, and if you see any bad signs, such as vomiting of blood, loss of consciousness, swelling, fever, eyes bulging and reddening, and other similar things in various dispositions, then it cannot heal without a doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a fearful accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the patient comes to you first, and it is winter, then you should remove the tooth before the fourteenth day that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the spring, then you should hurry to remove the tooth before the seventh day, so that the gum beneath the tooth does not become corrupted, and the accidents we have described occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone comes to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the broken part thus: and it is that you grip the head of the injured person, and expose over the bone in all the ways you can, and over the shape of the wound more gently than you can, and if bleeding occurs when exposing the bone, or the abscess swells, use aid as needed, and you must fill the site with moist rags soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the swollen abscess is soothed, and be sure of bleeding; then begin around the bone to remove, and it is done according to two ways of work: one way is that you scrape closely in front, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another larger cut than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have various cuts, some narrow and some wide, and they are pointed and made of iron; and work gently so you do not bleeding the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is thick and hard, you must pierce around it, so that you administer cauteries with needles, not deep enough to pierce through to the other side of the bone, and there should be a rim or circle at the tip, preventing the needle from going beyond the bone; and you must have several, so that each one comes in its place in the thickness of the bone, so that you have needles for all occasions. And this is the form of cauteries in three ways:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities for piercing around the bone are that you place a needle on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you feel that the bone is pierced; then move the needle to another spot a little later, and do this all around; then cut into the space of the bone which is between the perforations, and do this as skillfully and gently as you can, as we have said, so that you draw out the bone with your hand, or with one of the instruments you have, like tongs or pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sinus.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have penetrated the bone and cut it, then you must resect the sharpness which is stayed from the bone to any other similar instrument like a chisel, but it must be more tenacious and more subtle than the other chisels; and if anything of the small bones or any scales remain, lightly remove them with instruments; then cure the wound with tenting and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of treatment is that which Galen describes, which is safer; he praises it highly, and his word is final.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	First, you must expose a part of the bone, at the place where the fracture is open, so that when you have exposed that part, you shall place under the head of this lens-shaped incision, from which the fracture has occurred, in order to cut it.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, and the part is sore on both sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then hit with a small mallet above, so that you gently tap the bone all around, and be careful of the membrane that is underneath; if it sticks to the bone, loosen it gently, for the bone can be loosened without harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce through to the membrane, and the bone is only cut slightly on top, and there are small pieces, then one must smooth out that roughness, and remove the scales with a sharp rasp which you should have in various sizes, in order to adapt it to each location according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Take a large rasp first, and then a finer one afterwards, and do not stop doing this until it is smooth.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other subtle cuts and fractures, one must adapt it according to its nature; and this is not something that can be easily done by one who has not dedicated their study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the sinus is exposed, you should take a piece of linen according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it over the wound; then take another piece of linen folded in two or three times, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first piece of linen; and do this as gently as you can, so that you do not put pressure on the sinus, but only apply the poultice so that it adheres to the wound; and leave it like this for one or two days, until the abscesses are soothed, then remove it, and apply healing medicines such as lilium roots, and powdered vetches, and incense powder, and aristologus, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and place it over the wound, and then apply other medicines without biting; and be careful that the wound stays clean, so that you do not leave any of the ointment on it, nor allow pus to gather there, for when pus gathers over the membrane of the brain, it hardens and causes great harm to the patient; because when one applies something biting onto the sinus, it heals from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without a doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If darkness comes only because of the medicine that was applied and not because of any other cause, then you should take a portion of honey and three parts of rose oil and mix them together, and apply it to the ulcer; then treat it with the appropriate wound treatments until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two bones above are broken, either by themselves or with the one below, for these are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, but only bends or twists, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should boil your little finger or finger nail, and put the break inside your index finger, and hold it in place with a bandage until the nail grows back to its natural shape; do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your treatment.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is above the nail, and the fingers cannot reach the spot, then you must use the end of a thick stick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is in two parts, do this again, and try to restore it on the first day if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth day when the abscess has settled, then boil some flax cloth and put it over the break if it is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you attach another one on another side, if the fracture is there; and let the tents be so large that they fill the holes of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some restorers say that one must wet the bandages with butter, and change them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I do not think that is good, but one should wet the bandages with egg white and flour; then leave the bandage until the bone is set, and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes they attach goose feathers instead of tents, and around it a thin cloth, and the patient holds the fracture, and breathes in the medicine; do as you wish.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if hot abscesses come to the nose while you are working on it, then put a poultice of rose oil or in a little diaquilon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes out of it, then apply a poultice made from flour of linseed and powdered incense, mixed with egg white; then put on light bandages, and do not tie the nipple; and if the fracture is small, and the bone broken into tiny pieces, extract it using appropriate instruments; then close the wound, and treat it with healing, poultices, and ointments, as appropriate; and if there is no wound within the nipple, treat it with bandages, and apply plasters of pitch, until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the dislocation of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is dislocated below and there is no external wound, and the break is only out of place, and not broken in two, so that it curves inside, then one can easily tell.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the break is in the right part, you should put your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the break is in the left jaw, then put your index finger from your right hand, and gently push the break back into place, and adjust it with the other hand.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jaw is separated by one-sixth, then you should administer an extension of one-sixth, so that it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement in the teeth, or looseness, then they are restrained with a thread of gold or silver or silk; then apply cerotum to the broken jaw and place a double fold of cloth over it; and place a large well-made splint, or a piece of leather the same size, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it in place as tightly as possible; and instruct the patient to rest and eat soft foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the jaw has changed shape, then loosen it on the third day and reset it to its proper position; and apply a poultice over it made of powder from the mill with an abundance of egg or sisamum flour, after having removed the cerotum; and place a light lamb's wool poultice over that, and if the poultices start to rot, and the condition of the patient does not change, then leave them as long as it takes for the patient to recover; many have recovered within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if hot abscesses develop, then administer what we have already said many times.Et se il a contusion sus la mandibule, si met sus cerote, et sus le cerote lainne legiere, et li estele longes; et se li estele s’aert, met ainche sus lainne legiere, si come tu oges li contusions; et adonques covient il que li disloque la mandibule a leu.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	If there is a break and wound together, examine whether any piece of bone has been removed; then carefully remove it with suitable instruments for this purpose.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and there remains none inside, then stitch up the wound, if it is wide, and place upon it a suitable poultice to promote healing.
de la forcele	of the armpit
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The collarbone breaks several times in front, towards the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in three ways: either it is broken and dislocated in two places, with pieces, and is the easiest to heal; or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the procedure is, when there is no wound with the fracture, to have two assistants: one holds the shoulder where the collarbone is broken; and the other stretches the neck towards the affected side. Then, using your fingers, bring the fracture into alignment so that it is set correctly and there is no displacement or misalignment.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need more extension, place a round pillow made of cloth or wool under the shoulder of the patient; then lift and lower the collarbone, holding the pillow in your hand, so that you set the fracture correctly.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the collarbone out of its socket because it is too deep, then the patient should lie on his back, and place a small pillow under the shoulder, and the assistants should lift the shoulder from below, so that the collarbone bone is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then address the fracture with your hands, and if you find it broken, you must split it open; gently pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined because of an overhang, then use one of the incisions you have made to insert this instrument beneath the bone to push out the splinter:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	It should be the size of a spoon, not shaved down, and as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and the extent of the work; it should have two heads, as you can see, one wide and the other narrow, depending on the nature of the wound you made when you treated the bones; and once you are sure of the hot abscess, cut the wound open, and if the opening is small, or if you doubt there is a hot abscess, then pack the wound with bandages and tent it according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses come, soak a bandage in rose oil, garlic, and wine, and place it over the wound:
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The dislocation of the bone, when there is no wound or fracture, is to apply to the bone the poultice made from mill-dust and egg white, and place light gauze on top, and if necessary, place a spear under the shoulder; then take a very broad band one palm wide, and lay a doubled drape on the gauze and the poultice; then take a thin rod three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the band so that the end of the band hangs down; and place the rod on the break, and wind the band around the neck, and under the healthy shoulder, and under the affected shoulder; and adjust each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the break in place, and you clearly see that the rod is not moving over the broken bone, then re-bandage it every day, and when the ligature loosens, tighten it again; and have the patient lie on his back, and when he sleeps, place a small pillow under the shoulder to raise the shoulder; and thus the fracture will be lightened by the alignment of the shoulder joint, or tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it except in case of a bad accident, until the twentieth day; then start the poultice again if you see that it is needed, and adjust and leave it thus until it is healed; and it is usually healed within twenty-eight days, and less for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of a shoulder dislocation
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Then it happens that the shoulder is broken or widely displaced, and one feels it only by touch; then apply according to the pattern of the fracture, and reset it according to its natural shape in every way you can; then put flour from the mill with plenty of egg on top of the wound, and light gauzes, and place a double drape on top; then place a wide and thin board on top, a little wider than the shoulder, and if there is any hair underneath the shoulder, use a pad of linen gauze so that the board lies evenly; then tighten it with a large bandage tightly so that the board does not move from its place, and check the binding every day; and whenever it loosens, tighten it, and adjust the board if it has moved out of place, and let the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder is restored in 20 or 25 days. And when this number of days is complete, loosen it, and be sure, for it is not a bone that sets easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone has come out in front and is not under the collarbone, cut it away, and do as we have said before about heating the abscess to ease the pain.Et si li espaule est desaloiee par cause de moistor, et on la remet en son leu, et elle ne puet demorer en son leu, si revient adés et desalue par petit mouvement qui avient; si doit on la disloquer premierement, et puis la ramonyer.
de la brisure dou pis	of the break of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The penis is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; it often breaks at the foreskin.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it inclines downward, and the patient feels great pain and suffering, and becomes constipated and feverish, and may vomit blood, and the bones of the fracture become visible, and he feels much discomfort.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that the patient lies on his back, and puts a pillow between his shoulders, then presses his shoulders together, and brings the ribs together with his hands, and carefully tries to make the bone even in all ways he can, so that the figure of the bone is as it should be; then he applies plasters and poultices made from subtle salt, or other light substance, and wraps it in a cloth, and ties it onto the broken bone, so that it does not move; and winds the bandage around the back again, and tightens it gently, and checks every hour if it has softened, and if so, he tightens it; and if he needs to loosen it for corrosion or itching that comes to the area, or pain, or an abscess, then he should hurry and loosen it, and remove the plaster, and treat what has come from various cures; then he re-applies the plaster and tightens it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the break of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the fracture of ribs does not occur except in the large ones after the back, and in the head within, and they only bend because they are slippery; and one feels well on examination at the joints.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And in treatment, you must set the break evenly, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply the ointment and bind it with a bandage, if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining inward, then the patient feels great pain and stabbing, as well as a feeling of pleurisy, because the bone punctures the membrane; and he has a cough, and is hoarse, and vomits a large amount of blood, and it is a serious illness, and the ancients considered it dangerous.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that one should administer foods that swell the belly, in order to push the fracture outward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make any incision unless an abscess is hot, if it has not become so already.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has become so, then we lance it to let out the pus and the unhealthy matter.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some say that one should place cupping glasses over the affected area to draw out the excess fluids, and this is reasonable; however, there is a risk that the cupping glass may attract unhealthy fluids due to the weakness of the body.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	Some say that one should cover the affected area with warm, moist wool and place tenting between the ribs to ensure even pressure all around; then it should be treated with a poultice of pleurisy root, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain from the bone protruding through the skin, and there is doubt about the condition, then one must cut above the broken rib, and place an instrument underneath to ward off the phlegm; and then one must split the bone, and gently pull, and then sew up the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with ointments until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If a hot abscess comes, place moistened cloths in rose oil, and place them on the site; and treat the area around the abscess as needed, and let him lie carefully on his side where he should be, until he is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the break in the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes there is a break in the bones of the neck, and it bends; and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take note if you see his hands soft, swollen, and numb, and he cannot move or straighten them, and when you prick him with a needle, he does not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is deadly in many cases, and if they are mute and feel nothing when you dislocate and prick them, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the illness is cured, if one applies a remedy.Si tu vois ses mains enflees et molles et que l’on les estraint et poigne, si sent bien et muent, saiches qu’il n’est pas guerez, car la mort y entre.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar thing happens to the spine in the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, then take note if the feet are numb, and if the sensation is in the extremities, and in the back there is wind and urination without wanting it; and when he lies on his stomach, there is urination without wanting it.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he lies on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is deadly; therefore do not labor in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not occur, then the condition is more minor.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that you apply a hot poultice to the spine if there is an abscess, using rose oil or egg yolk until it is soothed; then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and he should not sleep on the side where he feels pain until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is exposed, then cover the wound with a bandage; remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a single stitch, and treat it with ointment until it is healed; and if the shoulder bone is broken, which is called the "shoulder blade," place your left hand's thumb in your right hand as tightly as you can, then apply the plaster and bandage it, if necessary; then bind it, and if there are exposed bones, put them back in, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Occasionally, the bone of the hip may fracture, and if it does, there will usually be some shortening at the head; and it feels long, and tilts to the side, causing pain, and puncturing and swelling where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over the break, so that it aligns with the fracture; and you identify where the fracture is, and its shape; and if the fracture is only at the head, then you put it back into alignment, so that it has a natural shape again.Et si li brisure est a la queue soulement, et que li chief soit en son leu, si met cele brisure en son leu natureil, tant qu’ele ne se mueve plus; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient dolor al leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it tilts inwards, then have the patient lie on his stomach, so that the restoration of the fracture can be prepared.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have put it in its place, then put on the plaster, then put on a splint of wood or horn, and bind the fracture so that it does not move; and apply the poultice under the armpit, until the limb is healed.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if painful bumps appear, do not touch them until the painful bumps are healed, and then apply what we have described earlier; and then return to restoration, and bind it as it should be, if there is no bad incident; and that is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder joint is what is between the armpit and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of two methods. The first is that you take a straight stick of moderate thickness, according to this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Tie the two ends of the stick with strings, and bend them upward, and have the patient sit on a chair; then let him lift his broken arm onto the stick, until it reaches the end, and place a crook on the stick, then lean over some heavy object or have an assistant hold him down; then bring the ends of the broken bone together in alignment with both hands, until the break is set as it should be.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	The other method is to have the patient lean forward onto his elbow, and tie his hand to his neck; then instruct two assistants, one to pull upward on what is above the break with both hands, and the other to pull downward at each end of the stick, pulling in opposite directions.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you want the extraction to be more forceful, then press the ligament below the fracture, and above it, and stretch each of the muscles on their own.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is close to the head of the shoulder, then you should put one ligament in the middle below the joint, and the other towards the neck, under the fracture; and likewise, if the fracture is towards the neck, then you should put the ligament lightly, without labor, so that the fracture is even on its place, and on the neck; then make the fracture even, as it should be, and press it, if no abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if a deep abscess comes, do not drain it for seven days, and put soft lamb's wool in the hollow, and rose oil, until the deep abscess is soothed; then drain it, and the way to drain it is to put the ointment on the break, then assemble the arm over the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or breast; and lay a cloth, and drain on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in place, unless something dislocates it, or the bone moves.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone will move, use splints, and put a larger and stronger splint over the break, and have two inches of space between each splint, and let each splint be large enough to stick out three inches on either side of the break; then drain over the splints, just as I said at the beginning of the chapter, more strongly and less in distance.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the settlement of the stars, and the constriction, as we have said, at the time that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the hot abscess, let it be bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at the binding every three days, so that itching or swelling does not come to the place, or the pus does not come to the member because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	As the adage says, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents come, do not loosen the binding until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and let him place his hands on his stomach; and place under the shoulder a pillow filled with wool equally, and check every hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken member does not move, or the binding become softened; then it will be healed by the power of medicine, and give him the food we mentioned earlier, in such a way that the food is very subtle; and when he begins to recover, let the food be solid.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to be wrapped for forty days; then one must loosen it, and administer a bath and ointment remedies to direct it to its place.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the dislocation is severe and stuck, it will stay for 50 days or two months.
de la brisure du bras	Of the break in the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the 'ulna' and the 'radius'. The ulna is smaller and is located near the armpit; the radius is larger and is located below, towards the little finger. Sometimes only the ulna breaks, sometimes only the radius, and sometimes both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, their restoration and healing is easy; but when the large bones are broken, healing is difficult and slower than when they are broken all at once.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it's only the small bone that's broken, one should gently extend and put it in place.Et s’il est brisié soulement li gros, li petis est a l’envers; il doit estre ramené a son leu.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the greater fissure, then it must be pulled out more strongly; and extend it on a pillow, and raise the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the little fingers lower than the other fingers, and let the patient be crossed over himself, and the pillow in front of him higher, so that the patient feels no labor; then extend the minister's upper arm to the part below his hand, or to the wrist, and another minister above it.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then put the minister equally, according to his best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if there are pieces in the fracture, place each one back in its proper location; and if there is any dislocation, hold the heart, and reset the bone as we have described earlier.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if the fracture has caused an open wound, I have spoken of it in a separate chapter; so take care with that treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of the restoration, hot abscesses occur, then glue a cloth of cerate made of rose oil and white wax, so that it is neither too hard nor too soft; and lay the cloth subtly over it, until the hot abscesses are eased.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the cerote, and apply the plaster of flour mill with an abundance of egg, then place the splints, and let the splint at the fracture be a bit stronger and slightly wider than the others; and understand that it must have six splints on the arm in various positions: whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two; and apply more pressure at the fracture site than anywhere else, and always less when stretching, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the cloths over the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and let the thread used to tighten them be made of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And re-examine the limb and the ligament after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you should moisten the limb with warm water until the itching is relieved; and let the limb rest without being restricted.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then restart the stretching, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones loosened, and similar things, then address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you see that the nutrients cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you should loosen it a little and leave it like that for some days, until the nutrients flow, and then bind it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not release him until 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Or else he should wrap his arms around his neck, and keep his head level, and avoid movement and exertion, and sleep on his back; and know that this broken bone will be healed in 30 or 35 days, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the combinations and complexions of the humors.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that in the back of the hand and at the base of the fingers there are few fractures, and they only come from manyfold folds.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is fractured or folded, one must have the patient stretch his neck and hold it straight in front of him evenly; then he puts his hand on a flat surface, and extends the minister the broken bones, and makes them even with each other, then he puts on a plaster and bandages, if no abscesses come, then he puts on a splint according to the quantity of the break; and it is wrapped in 1 piece of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is in the peritoneum around the abdomen of the plant, then make a ball of rags, and instruct the patient to hold it against their broken plant; and then pull it with a long cloth, and the stamp of wax as big as the palm of the hand, and hold it, as it should be.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the forearm, then you should put a splint on top and another underneath the plant, so that the hand is open and straight; then tie it all around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture is in any of the fingers of the hand, and it is the knuckle, then hold it even, as it should be; and hold it with the palm, and see if you put a small straight splint to raise the fracture, and do not move it; and if the fracture is in the other fingers, like in the index or one of the others, then hold it even, and tie the wounded finger to the healthy one next to it; or tie them all together while holding them, so that they do not move, or put a splint on top, as in the knuckle; and take care in the restoration and in the application of hot abscesses, and treat those that come up, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bones of the thigh are often broken, and one can see it well when they move forward and backward; and their restoration is such that one ties a bandage above the break, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And let the patient lie on his face, then extend each band evenly to its respective part; and this is when the break is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is close to the hip joint, then one ligament should be directed towards the buttock, and the other ligament beneath the fracture.Et li auter liiens que est sous le cotil, qu’il soit vers la cuixe.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is close to the knee joint, then the ligament should be directed away from the knee, and extension should be directed downward; then the physician should put the bone back into alignment with his two hands, as much as he can according to its natural shape, and then apply the poultice, and bind it, unless abscesses come about.Et li auter liiens que est sus le cotil, qu’il soit vers la cuixe.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if the break is between the bone and the flesh, then the bandage should be above the break, and the extension below; and apply the ointment under the bandage.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	You should wrap a folded bandage around the broken bone, and leave it there; then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the thigh, and wind a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and let the end of the thread come up above; then turn the bandage over the leg and the thigh, then put splints on the break, and put one splint on the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft rags to make the binding even, then begin to tie it tightly in three or four places around the break; and when you go higher up from the break, bind it more loosely; then tie the two ends of the thread that you wound between the thigh and the leg, and put three splints on top of them, then return underneath to the end of the thread, so that you come under the foot; and tighten it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, until no swelling or abscess comes, or anything similar.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If there is a break in the bone that can be seen, then it should be opened and cleaned as we have said many times before. If there is an impaled object in the wound, then it should be removed if possible; if not, then the area around it should be split open and the object pulled out. The wound should then be treated as we have described, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	Sometimes the thighbone can be broken like this when splints are placed on it, as can happen in the shoulder and arm; nonetheless, the patient will not be cured by this treatment alone.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And you shall know that the hip is restored in one day or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the groove of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the joint of the knee there is little breaking, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is only a split, or a perforation, and it happens to all wounds, and without wound, and this feels good to everyone.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And its restoration is to put it back into place, as much as it can be put back into place, then put on the plaster, and if necessary, put a round splint, and bind it as it should be, then follow all the instructions we have given for other fractures, such as hot abscess and similar things; then treat each incident as it occurs, so that it heals.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by right 'mustelz', and the other is called 'foscile'; and all injuries happen as they do in the arm, and therefore the restoration is the same as that of the arm, and the actions are all the same. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns from all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if only the small bones are fractured, then it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and one sees it well; and it turns underneath.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Therefore, administer extension, and make it even, and tie the splints evenly; but nevertheless, if the fracture is ugly, and there are several pieces, then the extension should be less and lighter; and adjust according to your ability.Et s’il est li brisures en un sol os, et ne peut estre igalement, si li convient que li extension soit menor que de l’auter.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have finished your work, take two wooden splints that cover the leg on both sides, and let them be as long as the leg from the knee down to underneath; then wrap two bands above and below, and tie it in the middle, and at this time the leg will not decline to the right or left, and so it is well; and some administer a basket as long as the leg, made of wood, and they place the leg to prevent movement, and properly do they apply this in the fracture where there is injury; and move the leg every day, to see if there is any hot abscess or other accident; and treat it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	from the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the metatarsal bones there can sometimes be a fracture, and it occurs in various ways.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if it happens that the bones of the foot are broken, and you see the bones on top of each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, and then put your own foot on top of his, where the bones are raised; then press until they return to their places. Then apply the ointment and bandages, and place a small wooden board under the arch of the foot, then bind it tightly to the foot in the appropriate manner, and then wrap cloth around it, and other things you may need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And after three or four days have passed, loosen the binding, for you will find the bones healed, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if one or more of the toes are broken, reset them as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place a splint according to the length of the toe, and let it be slightly larger; then place under the foot the board I mentioned earlier, and bind it tightly in place. If there is more than one toe that is broken, place a splint on each toe according to its size, wrap each one in a separate piece of linen, and bind the board under the foot. Let the top of the board press firmly against the sole of the foot.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And be sure to remember the other things we have said about other fractures, for each type of fracture requires a different treatment.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the break in the bone of the elbow
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bones of a woman's body are broken, make her sit upright, then lean forward to the back, and hold from behind; then fill the wound with cotton, and put in as much as you can; then make the woman stand up, and gently move her back a little, and the cotton will pop out, until it reaches the entrance of the wound, and the bones will return with the stool; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished, put it back in, and do this for seven days around the wound: the fracture will be restored. Then take a goat's bladder, tie it at one end, and blow into the other end until the bladder is inflated inside; the wound will then return to its original state. Then fill it with cotton, and leave it for some days until it heals.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the finger of man is broken, or that of a woman, restore it as we have said for the bone of the hip; and these breaks are not hidden from him who devotes himself to its study and practice, and understands my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the breaks indicate in various ways the right way to restore them; understand this therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	For a broken penis, take a goose's gullet and insert it into the penis; then wrap cloth around it and leave it for three days, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	from a break with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the thigh or shoulder bone or similar, that they be bled immediately, in accordance with the bleeding we have described earlier.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound bleeds, then resume reducing the dislocation in that same hour or that day, if no abscesses form.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses form, then leave it until the third or fourth day, as long as the abscesses are relieved; do not touch it on the second day, nor the third, for you would bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible on the uncovered chest, you should gently touch it with your hands, making small movements.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not become equal in your hands, then prepare this instrument of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and its thickness depends on the size of the wound; and for this, it is necessary to apply it with pressure, three or four times, according to what is needed in each case of a broken bone; and it should be round and slightly thick so that it does not bend under the compression on the affected limb due to your work, and it should be sharp at the front, and thicker from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called «palainche», because the curved shoulder should be placed upon the protruding bone; and when it is reset once, so that it returns, and is made even with the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle, and the instrument cannot well grasp the bone, then you must shave the head of the bone, so that the instrument can get a grip.Et se li chiés sont desaloiez a cause de moistor, et on les remettra et il n’i demourra pas, mais revient adés et desalue par petit mouvement qui advient, si convien que tu disloques la première fois.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then cut it with an appropriate instrument, either an incision or a saw, according to your ability; then remove what remains in the bone of sharpness and small fragments.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	Then do what you can to return it to its natural place, then moisten the cloth in black wine and gently apply it if the wound is clean; and do not put any ointment or other substance on the wound that might cause pus and corruption; then administer the poultice after resetting the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the rest of the injury according to its size, being careful not to constrict the wound with the bandage; and many fools have done this, causing their patients either death or corrosion; and such injuries are more painful and take longer to heal than other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is large or deep, and you fear that evil might come from it as we have said, and you feel pain in the area, then do not apply poultices; but wrap around the wound, instead of poultices, hard cloth, and bind them tightly.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days pus forming on the wound, then remove what you have placed over it completely, and apply an ointment that heals wounds, such as tetra-pharmacon and similar remedies.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary to loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is healed and closed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that the bowstring runs smoothly and lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they go astray for many days, and it cannot heal but keeps going back and forth, know that there are small pieces of bone, because of which you should probe the wound with a tent and remove all these dislocated pieces that cause the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula or any other kind of corruption occurs, you should treat it according to what he said in the chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, such as in the thigh or shoulder, and similar large limbs, do not treat it at all, for many die from it, but leave it be until it can heal; perhaps it will close after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound, if you can; if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of bruises that come on the healing site
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Many times after the break there comes health to the bone, especially when it is near the joint, and it is an ugly sight to see the shape of the limb; and by chance the limb cannot perform its natural works.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take heed therefore when the nose is blocked: let the medicine be astringents such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcocolla, and other similar substances, which you grind into a powder with wine, egg white or garlic; put it on the nostril in a bandage, tie it tightly, and leave it for several days; then remove it and start again, until the blockage is gone. You can also use a well-prepared piece of plaster; for the properties of plaster are that it removes all swelling from the limbs; and if the blockage has turned hard like a stone, and you need to remove it, cut it away, and make the surplus skin visible; or have it removed by a surgeon, so that it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb which is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is healed, and the limb remains weak and thin, this happens for many reasons: one is that it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and the limb could not receive nourishment; or due to excessive bleeding; or due to too much movement, and not at the right time; or because there is a lack of blood in the body, and so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the treatment is that you cause the patient to eat, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied within him; and administer a bath to him, and give him joy and pleasure; then place pitch on the limb, so that the pitch attracts the great coldness, and often wet it with warm water, so that the coldness runs into the limb; and return to its natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the limb bent after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limbs are bent after recovery, and the broken bones appear, and the form of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb completely anew; many fools have done this in our land, and these actions are blamed, and great harm results, and sometimes death; nevertheless, if the dislocations and torments are recent, then they should be wetted with hot water or herbs that soften them, such as leaves of plantain, and roots, and mallow, and similar medicines that soften quickly. You take the mucilage of plantain, and cook it with tallow or sesame oil, and make an ointment to apply to it; or you take ripe figs, and pound them with colon dung, and similar medicines.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the dislocation is caused by continually and constantly rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And every hour, movement must be applied to the limb.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is awakened and hardened, like stone, and it is necessary to remove it with iron, then one must cut it open to the bone, with a sharp knife lightly; and put cotton wool and study into the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to someone, one must immediately reset it without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the area will swell and sometimes the joint will be reset in place; therefore, one must not move it at the hour that it is swollen: many times, this brings about pain and other sufferings; nonetheless, when this occurs, let the patient be bled, then leave him, until the abscesses subside; after that, heat the limb with warm water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each limb as the healing comes back to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have arranged the chapters on dislocations from the head to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jaw
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It happens that the jaws become dislocated, and there are two types of double dislocation: they are slightly displaced from their place and slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging down towards the feet, causing saliva to flow from the mouth so that it cannot be held closed, and the tongue is wrapped around speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is minor, it can be treated with various remedies.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is complete and accomplished, then you must reset it quickly, without lingering; and in such a way that the minister grabs the head of the patient, and plugs his fingers into one of his hands at the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and the other two fingers are freed, to provide equal pressure; and instruct the patient to relax his jaws and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And he applies the cautery evenly until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the dislocation is of the two jaws together, treat it with hot water and oil, gently flexing them until they are reset; do not force the reset, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back into alignment and the mouth of the patient is closed well without softening, then place it on wet drapes made of rose oil and wax, and then tie it gently with soft ligatures; and let the patient sleep on his back, and let his head be between two cushions, so that he does not move to the right or left, nor try to open his mouth, but take light food, until the pains are gone and the mandibles are healed; and then let him eat what he wants lightly, and do not labor to open his mouth for eating and drinking, until the mandible is well healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be reset within an hour and are not converted to their place, then fevers and usual sores come, and possibly stomach problems, and possibly vomiting clear fluid.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is deadly; and many times the person to whom it happens dies within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The foreskin cannot be cured by cauterization near the glans or foreskin, and sometimes it is cured by cauterization further away, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; and then press the place firmly with your palm, and it will return; then put on the ointment and bandage, and tighten it; and the joint of the shoulder which is near the neck cannot be dislocated; if it does not heal, and if it dislocates again, reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the ointment and bandage, and tighten it, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed; and likewise is the shoulder joint reset when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: one way it dislocates at the part of the axilla below; the second is at the part of the foot; and by chance it dislocates above, and this happens rarely; and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor inside for the nerves; and often it dislocates below towards the axilla, especially in those who have little flesh, for in them it goes out violently; but in those who have sufficient flesh, it goes out slowly, and comes back slowly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And occasionally it happens to some people that they experience a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells from a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Then you must test it until you are certain, and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And you will perceive the dislocation when it is below towards the axilla, and there will be a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a manifest diversity between them; and you will find in the head of the shoulder a hollow, and under the axilla at the top of the shoulder, as if it were an eye; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move in any way; and likewise, if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you will perceive it clearly in the touch; and this manner of dislocation is not difficult to reduce when it is new, or if the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	The method is for the assistant to lift the hand of the patient up, then place their fingers under the shoulder, and forcefully lift the joint upwards in its place; while the assistant lifts the hand, and extends it upward, then places it down; this will work quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not return as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and they should be given soothing and softening ointments, such as a decoction of alder and fenugreek and sweet-briar in water, and then they should be rubbed down; then the patient should lie on their back, and place a layer of equal wool underneath, neither too soft nor too hard, then place the foot of the mirror on the layer, and gently lift the head of the shoulder, and pull the hand of the affected side; and another minister holds the head of the affected side so that it does not move downward; this shoulder will return immediately, and if you see that it returns according to this method: and it is good for you to have a man present who is larger than the patient; and he should be straight toward the coast, and push his shoulder underneath the mirror of the patient, and lift the mirror upward, so that the patient hangs in the air; and another minister pulls the hand of the affected side downward toward the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the dislocation is too slight, one may use something heavy with it, and the dislocation will return immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And one may also reset it in another way: insert a long rod into the ground so that the shoulder is as far from the stake as the length of the forearm, neither too thick nor too slender; then place the patient so that there is a cloth under him and he stands upright, with his hand stretched out below; then extend his arm downward on the other side, and the joint will return to its place gradually. If it does not return by all these means we have described, perform this treatment: take a rod two yards long and four fingers wide, with a pointed end so that it can be inserted deeply under the shoulder, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then tie it to the top of the shoulder with soft cloth so that the shoulder does not hurt the patient; then place it under the shoulder blade of the patient; and extend their arm above the shoulder, and tie the shoulder to the arm, and the arm to the head of the hand; then place the arm on a board that is wide enough, and extend the hand down, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, however it may be, you should place under the shoulder blade a woolen sphere that is equal in size, then apply the prepared plaster of mill powder with incense and egg white over the entire shoulder and around it; then tighten it under the shoulder blade gradually, and tie the string onto the plaster, and hold the hand to their neck, and let the hand remain like this.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And he should eat little, until the limbs are comfortable, for then he will heal faster; and then to eat more after .v. days or .vii., and move it; and if it is stiff and not柔软, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has been dislocated due to moisture or any other cause, you should apply fire cautery at three openings, as described in the chapter on cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates after .vii. days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot raise his arm upwards, then know that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are severed or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never return to its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocation which is towards the foot, and in the breasts, or behind, is done by pushing and stretching with the hands, and one administers to it otherwise; and treat it until it is healed.Li dislocation qui sont devers lou col, et les mameles, si est faite per impulsion et estendement de mains, et on li met autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing there is stiffness in the limb, and with movement it is delayed, then let the patient use the bath many times until that stiffness is alleviated and returns to its original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	from dislocation of the neck
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You know that the joint of the neck is dislocated with pins, and it returns with pins; and if it is dislocated all over, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not put back, for one can see it well and feel it well; and dislocate according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick armpit with the healthy one, then you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	Because the joint is stiff, and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you should reset it as soon as the abscess comes out, because if the abscess comes out, it will be painful to reset it; and by chance it cannot be fully reset, especially when it is in the back; so it is worse than other dislocations, and it causes more pain, and death may result.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration, when it can be reset, is to extend his arm with your two hands; and let his arms be spread out, and his hands turned towards you according to the joint, both inside and outside, and press the joint of his fingers together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he bends his hand towards his hand, and stretches from the root of the palm where it is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it will not return to its place, then give strong extension; and while two ministers hold the arm stretched out and twisted by both hands so that it does not move during extension, then bend the arm from each side, having first wrapped a long and wide cloth around it; then when you have joined the joint with your hand, anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then press the joint firmly back into place, and when it is in place, put on a dry poultice with egg white, and stretch it firmly, and bind the arm to the shoulder of the sick person, and leave it for several days, then loosen it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, then loosen the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not healing well, then start again with the plaster and the bandage, and leave it for a few days, until it is firmly in place; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	If he feels pain after the joint is reset and it moves, then bathe and rub it gently, and press until the pain subsides; or place a fat sheep's tongue on the joint, leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and have him enter the bath; and when he sweats, rub the joint gently, then put the tongue back on, and then enter the bath again; do this two or three times until he is healed; and if you see fit, place warm cow manure with butter on top, and hold it in place; it will return to its natural state.
li dislocation de la main	dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	When the dislocation of the hand is healed, and the return is easier than other joints, nevertheless, it must be reset gently, at the same time as when it was dislocated, so that the joint is swollen or an abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	The method of resetting is to place the patient's hand on a table, and extend his fingers, then you examine and bring it back into alignment so that his palm is against the surface of the joint, and hold it until it is reset; however, you must ensure that it is in the correct position; then have him place the back of his hand on a table for extension and resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, then have the patient lay his hand flat on a table, and with his other hand he should press down on the area around the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it pops back into place now, that is good. If not, then apply hot poultices to soothe the swelling and pain, and leave it be without moving it again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	If he cannot bear the pain and you cannot reset it after several attempts, then leave the joint crooked; and do not hurt the patient any further as long as his hand is swollen and numbed, and he cannot grip anything tightly: then know that the nerves are cut, or an artery; and there is nothing more to be done except to cauterize the wound, and perhaps nothing else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, then put on the plaster that we have described, then constrict it and leave it for .v. days, then loosen it and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is any swelling, then wet it with warm water and rub it until it is healed.Et s’il en a une grante, si le remede est que li mains se tienne au chaud sus la grieteit, et qu’il soit eslongeit tant qu’il soit sanez; car li membres longes sont plus tost sanaiz que li courts.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the dislocation is on one side of the fingers, sometimes on the back of the palm or on the inside; then it can be straightened and pushed back into place using your thumbs, while holding the finger towards the area where it is dislocated; leave it for two days, then straighten it again that day, and don't bind it, as we have said, but loosen it at night, and move it during the day, and do this often until it heals. Do the same if it is dislocated on the inside of the hand, and do as before, until it is healed; and do likewise, when it is dislocated in other places.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	from the dislocation of the skull from the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the skull at the back or neck is dislocated, there are several dislocations, and there is no cure, for death hastens the illness.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the evacuations occur without voluntary effort, and one cannot hold them in, and many times a limb becomes paralyzed, either both legs or both arms or one, and often the skin mutates in four places; when it happens at the back, it is called "gilbositez". The cure is to find out if the gilbositez occurred from childhood: if so, there is no cure nor healing.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient books on medicine describe at great length, but I have summarized it according to my understanding, and have devised instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the gilbositez which comes at the front feet, there is no healing; and also that which comes straight in both sides, and cannot be cured except by that which comes directly at the back, as I said; and it happens that the patient extends his face in one place equally, and has pressure underneath him so that he does not bend; then insert a brand in the earth at the head, and another at the feet, and tie a ligature underneath the seat of the dislocation, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles; and let two servants hold the ligatures, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the brands; and let them be well secured, the brand as we have said, and let the assistant put his palms on the spine until he revives.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return with this treatment, take a board three arms long, and lie under the wall, and let the patient be on his side, and push the head of the board under the wall; then place the middle of the board on the spine, and put his feet on the other end of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place. And if you see fit, do it on the turn which turns to the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And you shall drive two nails into the head of the patient's arm, and two others by his feet, and there should be between each nail, above and below, a palm's length of space; and there should be in each nail a hole, through which the rope runs, and the nails are firmly driven into the ground so that they do not move; and between each pair of nails there should be a turning nail, on which the ropes turn, and there should be two small nails on the turning nails, each a palm's length long, for turning the ropes; and then tie one end of the rope, which is among the nails, to the turn towards the head, and the other end of the rope towards the feet to the other turn, and each minister turns his turn to all the rope, and the master makes the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is healed, put on a drying plaster with an egg-white base, and then the poultices, and then the cast of a tablet three inches long, which colors the area of the hunchback and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage, as we have said, and use the patient's subtle numbing medicine until he is healed; and if anything comes in the end of health, one should administer softening and soothing medicines, with the cast that we mentioned earlier; and sometimes they apply a piece of plaster, and sometimes the appearance comes in the rear spine of the back, and they think it is dislocation; but it is the bone that appears, so one must not be presumptuous about it: it could bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	You know that the joints of the hip and the shoulder only come about as dislocations, not like other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and most inside, and a little dislocated in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when one joins the affected leg with the healthy one, the affected one is longer, and the affected knee joint appears more than the healthy one, and the affected person cannot bend their knee to the fire; and the area which is swollen with a hot abscess due to the head of the thigh bone coming loose.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes in defense, it is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him who happens in front, it is that his leg is well according to the fulfillment; nevertheless, he does not double the knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot before, and retains his urine, and the veins swell, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who happens behind, it is that he cannot extend his knee, nor double it, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the veins are softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The remedies for this type of dislocation are that you examine whether the dislocation is old, and it persists according to its nature, then there should be no treatment; and it must not have any presumptuousness.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for those where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four types of dislocation, you should quickly return the joint to its place, and stretch it both inwards and outwards, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will return to its place, and will not need further treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this way, then you must prepare a strong minister, and extend the leg strongly with two hands, or with a bandage tied above the knee; and another minister extends his hand above in such a way that he presses his hands under his heels, then tighten a leather thong around the thigh; and another holds the head with a band; and they stretch upwards and downwards all at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground at once and remains pendant.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension applies to all four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, that is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, then put on a tourniquet When the dislocation is in the buttocks, you must support the patient on his healthy side, then put the bandage around the root of the thigh, and the place under the anus; then stretch the band upwards towards the anus and towards the scrotum; then another minister grabs his arms and squeezes the thick part of the diseased thigh, and stretches it forcefully: it will return to its place now; and this type of dislocation is more gentle than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot tighten it in the manner we have said, then you must tie the patient's two feet together with a strong leather strap below the heels, and above the knees, with the affected leg extended two fingers more than the other; then let him be hung from the end of a pole, and let his arms hang down about two lengths; then order one minister to hold the head of the thigh firmly, and another minister hanging with the patient, who holds the thigh firmly, for the joint will now return quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is healed, let the patient lie as we have said in that which concerns sciatica, and tighten the strap on the affected leg properly, and also above the foot; then put two torches, one at the head and one at the feet, then insert the torch between the thighs of the patient in the middle; and let there be a pile of moist cloths laid on, so that it does not scorch the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and let the surgeon apply pressure evenly with his hand to the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns to its place, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put him on a table and press it as we have said in the case of dislocation, and lay the patient on his healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, one should extend the affected leg gently, and according to what I have said; and let the assistant put their weight on the painful shoulder, then press with the other hand, and push it down towards the knee.If the limb is not extended, then take a staff and place it under the limb, and lift it up until the dislocation goes back into place. If that does not work, then cut through the clothes and press directly on the joint.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is in the hip, then one must not extend the patient downward or lift him up from the ground, but he should be as if his hip were dislocated and out of joint, as we have said about lying on two hips; and let him lie on his face, with the bandage extended as we have said before, and someone press upon the joint while he is on the table; and when the patient extends his legs and they are even, then draw the thighs together and apply the plaster, and constrict it with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and let him rest for three or four days, then loosen it and apply the plaster again; and if you see that they are even, then constrict it as before, and let him rest for three days, then loosen it and let him walk comfortably until his limbs are healed.
de la dislocation dou genoil	On dislocation of the knee:
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to know, inside and outside, and behind; and it does not dislocate at all in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend their leg at the thigh, and if it does not straighten at the thigh, then you know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit up straight, and extend their leg if they can, and place your back against their chest, and put their foot on your feet; then take their knee in your palms, and pull between your fingers, then bend both sides of the knee gently; and another minister extends the foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that it straightens well at the thigh slightly; and apply the plaster, and let the leg breathe at the thigh, and bind them together tightly for three or four days, then release it; and do not have the patient walk, until the limb is healed.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the member is not at all, then administer a very strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	Heels are sometimes smashed, and sometimes completely dislocated, both internally and externally.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it hurts when pressed on the affected part; the remedies are light, and one must stretch it gently by hand when it is only dislocated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is healed all over, you must make the patient sit upright, and hold his leg firmly by the ankle; then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice; then extend it upwards, and press the foot firmly upwards; do this twice as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it goes back, that is good; if not, repeat the procedure, for it will go back; and if it cannot return in this way, make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and fix the bandage firmly in the ground between his buttocks, and wind cloth around it so that he does not move; then hold his leg firmly by the thigh, and another person extend the foot upwards towards their hand, or to the strap around his ankle; then extend each person equally, and have the bandage held firmly between the patient's buttocks to hold him in place when they are extended; then put the dislocation back into place with your hands, and another person holds the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is at its worst, then apply the plaster and poultice, and bind it tightly, and tie the foot to the leg, and be careful of the nerves that are behind the ankle, that the bandage is not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the bandage softens, then tighten it; then loosen it on the third or fourth day, and let the patient walk in four days; and if he walks before that time, it is not certain that he will not relapse.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a deep abscess forms, you must calm it down as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	of the armpit
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the arms are dislocated, they should be stretched without force, and that is a minor matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in the small of the back or foot, then you should make the patient lie on his back on a flat bed or table, and place your foot on what is exposed by the joints, then press firmly on your foot, until it returns to its place; and when it is even, and there is nothing sticking out, then put under the sole of the foot a two-legged board, then tighten it firmly, and leave it for three days, then loosen it; and let him rest until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound occurs with dislocation and you want to restore it, many times the patient dies: so do not be presumptuous in the treatment if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time; and if you are not merciful and compassionate, do not attempt it. At the beginning use things that soothe hot abscesses, and leave the patient in God's hand if you see no hope of recovery; but when you do see hope, then immediately reset the limb so that the hot abscesses may heal; and once the limb is in place, administer soothing remedies to the abscess, and treat the wound as it should be done with drying ointments. If there is a fracture and broken bones, set the bones and do as we have said for simple fractures; but beware of rushing into fear according to what I have said, for it will bring you harm according to your Creator, and for the sake of your soul and your body.
Amen	Amen
