O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O thou, most dear son, I have completed this book which is the last in the science of medicine together with its completion, and have made an end through its expositions and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hands, that is to say, 'surgery'.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of the hands is scorned in our region and is considered strange everywhere, the knowledge has been lost and discarded, and nothing remains but brief descriptions in books by the ancients that our hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are hidden and knowledge is kept at a distance.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	I think it is necessary to animate this treatise together with the order of this text according to the way of exposition and declaration and of abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the instruments of cautery, and of other tools of the work, with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine has been neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And one who undertakes this must be proficient in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the number of bones, and the movement and of the blood vessels that are moving and at rest, and their points of exit.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And therefore Hypocras says that what is done with the name is much, and with the work is little; and likewise in the art of medicine.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously mentioned, beware that he does not stumble into error and harm people; just as I have many times seen several of those who interfere in this science and so abandon themselves without knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish doctor who cut an abscess of scrofula on a woman's neck, and cut the arteries in the neck; so much blood poured out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another doctor who treated a stone in a man's testicle, and the stone was large; he took out with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.Et vis un autre qui traït une piere de la teste d’un home, et li home cheit mort au lit li miex en iesme jor.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I saw another who treated a stone in a man's head, and the man died in bed the same day.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another case which involved the treatment of a duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound; and the ignorant surgeons bound the break over the wound with a tight bandage, and left nothing to drain the wound, but tied it up like that, and commanded that he should not untie it; and thus he stayed until the leg became swollen all the way to his foot and came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to him, and hurried to untie the leg; and when I had untied it he felt no pain and was at ease.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	However, the corruption had already set in in the limb, and I could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until it was entirely destroyed.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another surgeon who lanced a large abscess, and then inflamed it through the wickedness of his lord.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For when a ulcer is free of melancholic humor, one should not touch it with iron unless it is in such a place that one can completely remove all that which is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of the hands is divided into two parts: that is, in work where there is danger in various situations; and I will show in each section of this book where there is doubt and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	It is therefore necessary that you be careful, so that the foolish crowd cannot speak ill of you. Take up your weapons in the name of Christ, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the best means so that by the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; leave behind terrible illnesses of grief, and remove your weapons from whatever causes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you may pass from this world into the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in some of his warnings: "Do not take on a serious illness unless you are called by the foolish crowd.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have arranged this treatise into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medicinal water cauteries, and it is ordered from the head to the feet; and about the forms of instruments, and about cautery tools, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	And the third chapter is about dislocations that come from accidents in various limbs, and about burns from fire or medicinal water, and from thorns and arrows, and about mortality that comes from one limb to another.The second chapter is also about cutting and piercing, and about cupping and wounds, and about extracting arrows, and similar things; and it includes the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twisting, and similar things; and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus, as we remember the work, it is necessary that I say the quality of aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the longest speech and most subtle science, and the secret responses; and most of the sages spoke about this and agreed upon it. I am content with a little of their words, for I am reducing the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery aids universally in all complexions where there is matter, for there are two complexions: namely, hot without matter, and dry without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions when the matter is together, some people say that cautery is very helpful; while others say the opposite: cautery is not useful for diseases that arise from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	Because the nature of fire is hot, it should not be treated with heat for hot diseases, nor for dryness; and those who say otherwise claim that cautery provides great relief for hot and dry diseases that affect the human body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	Because when you compare the human body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found this to be true through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And yet, one should not meddle with this treatment unless they have experience with cautery and a long understanding of different complexions, diseases, their causes, prognoses, and the seasons; we fear not for those of other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all agreed on the use of cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my son, that cautery with fire is one of the secrets of cures and a more excellent remedy than burning cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and it only affects the cooked member and does not harm any other member if it is not named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Burning medicines spread from one member to another by moving away and bring illness to the members of grief; and by chance, fires because of their heat and because of the goodness of their substance do not do this unless there is an excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this through experimentation and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and I was above the truth of things; and because of this, I excuse myself for the length of my speech, because I do not want to take away from you the secret that is reserved for fire, and the quality of the work, how it cures illnesses of the body, as the philosopher says in his demonstration; so receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on which times cauteries should be performed, and chose certain days for them.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the harmfulness underneath is removed by the aid of cautery; and especially if the cauteries are for necessary and urgent pains that cannot wait until a later time when greater harm may come to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear son, as the foolish do; for a disease that is healed by cautery does not return; and they say so, but it is not as they believe, because cauteries are not medicines that change the complexion, but dry up the humors that cause pain, and are better than medicines in their effectiveness, and because of their virtue and significance.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease may come again according to the complexion of the ailment and its location and its strength; and are gathered in it the excesses through the digestion of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered where there is little of these excesses and moisture, such as dental cauteries for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but that happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine; but it is true, for when we administer methods of cure in any illness and they fail, then we administer the cautery and it succeeds.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is clear that cauteries are indeed the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that a cautery instrument of gold is more effective than one of iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of gold or the height of its substance; but they said that the heat of the cautery does not cause blisters, but that is not true, for I have experimented with it and found that it is true in some people; and a gold cautery is more effective than one of iron, just as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet when you heat the gold instrument, you cannot tell when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down very quickly; and if it is heated too much, it will melt in the fire; and so there is great danger with this method.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And because of this, we use fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have arranged this chapter from head to foot, so that the way is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of the olive-oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is useful for moisture and coldness in the head, and there are two reasons for it being used because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that flow from the head to the eyes and ears, and because of many pains in the teeth and throat, and especially for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the patient is purged with a cleansing, dissolving medicine for 3 or 4 nights, depending on what the strength, age, and condition of the disease can endure; and then have the head of the sick person washed.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then have him sit cross-legged in your hands and put his hands on your legs; then place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes, where your two middle fingers meet, so it bleeds underneath. Then heat up the cautery, which is called "olivare", with which this is done:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the area marked with ink, moving your hand up and down and twisting it gently; then lift your hand gently and check the spot to see if you can see a small bone; if not, repeat the cautery as I have told you until you do. Then take a little salt and put it in a piece of soft cloth, and place it on the area; leave it for three days, then apply a poultice of moistened cloth in butter; leave it until the blister is healed; then treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if the ancients say that the more time passes with the wound open, the more it purges itself; and for this reason, it helps to use leeches.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some said that one should let the cautery burn so long that part of the bone is burnt, and then one should scrape away what is burnt from the bone, and it will be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others said that one should let the cautery burn so high and stab so deeply that it cuts away as much bone as a needle that women put in their fuses to let the humors flow out; then one should leave the wound open for a long time; after, one should cure and close it.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And I do not think that either of these two cautery methods is good at all, except in some people where there is fear; and I think that I should leave it, for the shoulder is weakened by continuous dislocations, as we witness in other members; and likewise when the shoulder of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more safe and mild, then I use this method.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	from the old pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When throughout the head there is chronic pain that lasts a long time, one must use the sick person's herbs and pills which are called 'cochie', and purges for the head, and oils and poultices; and if they apply to him the cautery we mentioned earlier and it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the sick person is of a robust nature and not too cold; then cauterize it under that fire cautery a little bit as we said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After that, cauterize each horn of the head just to the bone as we said before, and do one cautery in the place called 'vessel'; and there is a place where one applies leeches; and lighten your hand so that you do not go all the way to the bone: the patient feels much greater pain with this cautery than with others, and I will speak of it later; and the cauteries on the horns should be more subtle than those used for cauterizing the middle of the head, and that is the shape:
dou cautere dou chief	of the cautery on the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain arises in the head and the illness extends to the eye, and the shoulder is purged with purifying medicines, and one has done the other remedies that I have said in the division of illnesses, and all this does not help: then one should make cauteries according to 2 methods, that is to say, with hot water and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery with hot water is that you take an egg, remove the shell and cover it with a piece of cloth as big as two fingers, then make a poultice where the pain is in such a way that you can put the egg under the skin; and when it is applied, tie it well and leave it for 12 hours; then untie it and take away the egg, and leave the poultice for 2-3 days; then place a linen cloth soaked in butter on top until the abscess drains.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the poultice, treat with an ointment until it is healed; and if you see that it is not healing, do one of the burning remedies that I have written about in the 12th chapter on burning remedies.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery is as follows.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery until it is at the right temperature:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "cauterization" because the tip is formed into a small cup shape with a slight curve, and when placed over the painful area, your hand and the instrument are turned slightly so that half of the thickness of the skin is burned; then lift your hand so that the artery does not blaze and abundant blood flows.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	Afterwards, put cotton wool in wine, and hold it over the area for three days; then moisten cotton with butter, and use ointment to treat the area until it heals; and if you want to cauterize this hemorrhoid with the cautery called  "spoon-shaped", which is pointed at the tip, be careful not to touch the artery in this hemorrhoid, which is not old.
de emigraine	of hemorrhoid
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat hemorrhoids as we have previously discussed in the sections on diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cauteries we have previously mentioned with medicine or fire do not work, then you should heat the cautery called  "spoon-shaped" until it is white; and draw a line about half an inch long over the painful area, holding your hand once, and be careful not to touch the artery and cause it to bleed all the way to the bone; and be cautious of the jaw so that it does not move when chewing, and the nerve should not spasm and cause pain. Be wary of blood flow from the artery when it is cut, as it can be dangerous, especially for those who are unfamiliar with it and are not experienced or knowledgeable. Leave the wound open; however, I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is cut, and I will show you where this occurs in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the wound in the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have spoken of in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has .ij. knives; and this cautery is better than the other and more effective.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	from pain in the ears due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ear persists despite the application of solutive medicines and other remedies mentioned earlier in this section, and the pain still does not subside, then heat this cautery, known as the "point," which has this form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After piercing around the ear on the affected side, or on both sides if the pain is in both ears, move slightly upward from the root of the ear where you have marked the site; and make .x. piercings around each ear; then treat the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	There is no cautery for torments that come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not use cautery on appearan
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this kind of torture that comes from phlegm through cleansing the head and gargling, and if this does not work, then you must cauterize the patient with . three cauteries: one in the root of the ear, another a little above the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; and apply the cautery to the part that appears healthy, and also cauterize the top of the ear just below the horn of the head, and another one in the temple about the length of a thumb; and leave the cautery on until half of the brain is burned; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the shape of the blade we mentioned earlier, but it should be a little more flexible and the knife should be a little thicker; after that, treat the area as I have described before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but it does not improve, and the patient has a fever, then do four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one where it is called 'vasselz' as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and let it be treated as we have said before.
de litargie	of litharge
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient large and cleansing pills for the brain; then wash the head of the patient thoroughly, and apply to his neck the poultice of mustard which is written about in the treatise on poultices; and here is the manner of the cautery: perform it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is healed thus, it is good; and if not, do three cauteries in the middle of the head going down to the neck, and have a distance of one finger between each cautery; and heal him as the others, and if you see fit to adjust, and the patient is suffering, do one cautery in the middle; and if need be, two more on the two horns, and heal him as before. And let it be the cautery which is called 'olivare', as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of coldness from the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to cleanse the head of hair and other things as we have said before; then wash the head of the patient, next cauterize inside the head and on each temple, one behind the ears, and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, then cauterize four times on the spine of the back; and let it be until the heart is burnt, and then lift your hand; then cure it until it is healed, and use the cautery called "olive" that we mentioned earlier.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use cauterization except for those who are phlegmatic; it is necessary to first cleanse the brain of hair and other things as we have said in the division when the patient is suffering greatly and needs medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot bear it, make him gargle and chew, purifying the brain often with good meat; after the king, place the head in the middle, and do to him .i. cautery according to what we have said before, and .i. cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the disease is strong and painful, do to him cauteries as I have said for paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be of olive according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the disease is in a child, do to him 1 subtle cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When through the cause of melancholy there are corrupted humours and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with cauteries as we have said for paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if through the cause of melancholy the superfluities decline towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink that will purify the brain, according to what is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After dressing the wound, make a well-fitting linen bandage, like a ring, and place it around the head; cross the ends of the bandage and tie them securely all around; then apply the poultice and use old mutton suet; heat gently so that the patient can bear it; remove the bandage from within the circle and let it cool; do this for the wound once a week with good care, until it heals.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or, if you want to cauterize him by making several small marks all over the cautery tool:
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This cautery method moistens the brain significantly; afterwards, place wet cotton in tallow and chicken fat on top:
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When eye disease first appears with the signs that I have described in the division, then begin and give the patient a cleansing drink for the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make him sweat in a bath several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he commands the patient to look up, and cauterizes in the scalp, and makes .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples if the descent of the eye is together in both, or if it is just one; and cauterize all the veins and arteries that are under the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it with as much power as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you the extraction of arteries and incision the cautery, how you should stop it; and sometimes a cauterization or incision is done under the .ij. bones in the back.
dou cors des larmes	where the body weeps
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears are old and accustomed to being in the veins, or among the arteries that are on the appearance of the forehead outside; and one sees that it is from cold phlegmatic superfluities, then he makes the cautery that I said at the beginning of the descent of the eye: .i. cauterization in the scalp, and .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples, and .ij. cauteries or hatereil under the .ij. bones; and if there is a need for more, he cauterizes bleeding above the eyebrow with a small cautery all over.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	tears flow from within them
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat them according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three nights of leeches; after that, bleed the head, and make him a cautery with olive oil in the middle of the cautery; and make two cauteries called "clavilis" on the two joints, one just below the hairline; and be careful of the artery, that you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery called  "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this tool called "olive":
de coi ci est li forme:	It should be formed like this::
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see to do so .i. cautery on the .ii. warts as long as the sorcerers are; and don't leave your hand unless the third part of the paper is burnt, according to the manner I said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes the hair of the eyes becomes converted into warts, and prick the eye, and they do cauterizations according to .ii. manners: that is to say, with fire, or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a healthy state; afterwards draw on the paper a figure that is as long as the furrow of the myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be among the hairs; then moisten cotton with egg white and plantain pulp on the eye, then heat the cautery from which the shape comes:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure that you have marked little by little many times until the skin is burned in that place; and the sign of healing is when you see the paper drawn up, and the hairs standing at an angle from the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then moisten cotton with butter until the scorch is healed; afterwards dress the wound with ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards the hairs come again, and the paper becomes soft, then begin the cautery in the same place again as you did before; and if the hairs are pulling it, then cauterize until the paper returns to its natural state, and is even, and do not pull at the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are long and even, then make parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and live coals, of each one part, and grind them together well; and make it quickly so that it does not cool, then spread it on the shape that you made like the myrtle leaf, and put it on the paper among the hairs; and if the disease is in only one eye, do this once, and if in both as well; and put under the eye cotton moistened with egg white; and let the patient's hand remain so, and press a little and move it every time the patient feels burning from the medicine, for he will feel burning just as from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the bite has passed, lift up the eyelid, and examine if the paper of the eye is raised just as it was raised by the heat or by incision; if so, that is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, then apply the medicine to the affected area again until your actions are complete and the eyes are in their proper position; then place wet cotton in tallow until the burn is healed, after which clean the area with medicine called "diaphenes" and others, until it is healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to take great care in your work so that the medicine does not get into their eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hair pricks in the eye, then restart the medicine on that area which has softened from the paper properly, just as you did before; cure it until it is healed; and this is the form of the myrrh poultice:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to this, your constraints should be adjusted; and do not deviate from the right path for one who has studied this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	on the treatment of a fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you are treating a fistula as we have discussed in the sections on diseases, and your treatments are not helping, then you must use cautery according to the following method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head in your lap; and have an assistant hold their head steady between their hands so that it does not move or drop; then dip cotton into vinegar or juice of nettles and apply it to the eye; next, heat the cautery which should be shaped like a tent with a point on one end, and if you can, let it be curved like the roof of a tent; but a straight one will also work for your purpose.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Afterward, press the fistula if it is open and clean it, and if it is closed, open it and draw out any pus; then heat the cautery and hold it firmly in place at the edge of the eye socket, taking care not to burn yourself; place the cautery in the grease around the eye and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery as far as the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then restart the cautery again, and if necessary, do so a third time, and leave it for three days; then moisten cotton in butter and apply it to the wound until it is healed, and if 40 days pass and it is not healed, apply an corrosive ointment until the bone is exposed; and treat the king according to how he fares.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	There is a way of cauterizing a fistula which some of the ancients described.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	For a fistula, cut into the area; then insert into the slit the sharp end of a needle, which has been made thin by hammering.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make the quantity of an egg; and hold your hand or needle firmly, and do not move the patient at all so that the melting wax does not run into his eye; and one should put on the eye of the patient moistened cotton in olive oil or in a mixture of wine: the wax will fill the fistula, and heal miraculously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed through this cautery which we described, that's good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, one must use a probe and move the fistula back into the body of the nail according to what is appropriate in its own place.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times cracks occur in the lips which are called "warts," and especially on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have described in the sections, and the treatment is ineffective, then heat a small metal spatula according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it gently in the cracks until it reaches the bottom; then treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess forms at the root of the throat, or in the uvula, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, causing pus and swelling and becoming a fistula; and you treat it as we have described in the section on incisions, but it does not heal: then you must use a cautery depending on the size of the fistula; after cleaning out the fistula, hold your hand steady so that the hot iron reaches the bottom and the back of the fistula; do this once or twice after cleaning as described above, until it is healed; and if it is healed in this way, that is good; but if not, then you must expose the site and remove any corrupted bone, according to what you find in your examination.
dou movement des dens	from the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it does not help, then put the patient's head in your lap; after heat the cautery which will be described below in such a way that you place a candle on the tooth; and place the hot cautery inside until the patient feels the heat going to the root of the tooth; then lift your hand and reapply the cautery according to your judgment; after fill the patient's mouth with salted water, and let it sit for an hour and take away the forces.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way, a tooth that was loose is now firm, and the gums softened are restrained, and corrupted moisture is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	from toothache
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from coldness, or there is coldness or whiteness, and medical remedies do not help, then there is need for cautery in two ways: butter cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Butter cautery: take butter from a cow and the end in an iron or brass spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent, moisten it in the butter, and place it on the aching tooth until it cools down; do this repeatedly until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. If you see the cotton and butter cool, heat the iron again until the fire reaches the gum of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cauteries using fire are such that you should hold a rod of iron or brass, and it should be thick enough so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient; then heat the cautery, which will draw out the form later, and place it on the tooth, holding your hand until the cautery cools down; do this often because the pain will be relieved that very day or the next day.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And the patient should fill his mouth with good butter in preparation for this cautery, and then release it; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And do cauterize with whatever tooth you want, and according to what you have power over; and this is the form of the rod:
des scrophules	of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula is of phlegmatic and cold moisture, and does not respond to digestion through medicine, then heat the cautery needle as described below, and it has two openings for smoke to emerge from the other end; and apply the hot cautery needle to the abscess once, where it is needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days; then moisten cotton in butter and apply it to the burn until the burn is healed; after that, dress the wound with ointments and bandages until it is completely healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture prevails in the channels of the stomach, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient should first be purged with soluable medicines; after that, cauterize at the root of the throat, and be careful not to go any further than the throat, but burn only a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, give another cautery at the joint of the neck at the head of the spine, and use the cautery called "clavicle" as shown in the figure above; then heal the area as described earlier until it is healed.
de la toust	of the toast
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all diseases of the diaphragm are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is old, make two cauteries on the sternum in the affected areas; and another cautery between the breasts, using the cautery called  "clavicle" as described earlier.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see fit, give cautery all along the cautery called "points", as shown in the figure for the disease of the ears; and let the points extend to XXX or surrounding areas.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After healing the site according to what has been said before, and the cautery is performed three times according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for this reason cauteries are gentler when you do them three times.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of shoulder dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, have the patient lean on his back and his side; then lift the heart which is inside the armpit with both hands; and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery which has two hairs of oak until it glows red:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the skin until it pierces all the way through, and the figure of the cautery will appear with four cauteries; and this is why there is a cautery made with the three-nerved cautery, so that there are six cauteries; and the nerves follow the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the three-nerved cautery:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is adjusted over that one nerve so that there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Afterwards, put crushed pepper on the cautery; afterwards, let the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until he is well healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, which happens seldom, then do cautery on the thick part of the cautery fork, or with a lot of cauteries piercing.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	Because the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When chills and a lot of moisture occur in the stomach to the point where it strays from his complexion, and his catharsis increases, and the usual methods of cure do not help, then the patient should be laid on his back, with his legs and arms extended.And one should put cauteries on his chest and belly, and if the coldness is in the head, put cauteries on his temples, and if it is in the limbs, put cauteries where it hurts most, to draw out the moisture.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	Then afterwards, do three cauteries on the bottom of the foot, according to its size, with the entire cautery fork, and two cauteries on either side so that the shape of the cauteries has three angles, and there is some space between them so they do not touch when they bend; and the cauteries should be deep enough that they bleed from both parts of the chest, and the shape of the cauteries follows this form without adjustment:And if he has pains in his back, do cautery on his back, and if he has pains in his chest, do cautery on his chest.And let him drink no wine or ale for three days beforehand, only water.And give him a bath before the cautery with warm water, not hot, and after the cautery, let him stay out of the wind.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see fit to cauterize with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form; and for those who fear this cautery, cauterize in small punctures and sign on the stomach one point according to the quantity you wish to put in; then cauterize with all the cautery which is called 'points'.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure of the cure that we have just discussed, until it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	As for the liver, pain comes from cold and moisture and excessive winds, when it has been removed from its natural condition by excesses; and the patient is treated of this as we have said in divisions, but if it does not benefit him, then the patient should be laid on his stomach; and three cauteries should be marked in according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, avoiding the hypochondrium, where the ribs of man come from; and there should be the thickness of a thumb between each cautery, and the cauteries should be long from the body, and do not press your hand too much on all the cauteries; and only half the heart should be burnt, and the patient should lie straight on his back on his feet; and if he cannot, then he should lie down with his legs stretched out and his arms raised; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you wish to cauterize with a knife, be subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn all over the heart, for you would dry out the whole body; and let it not come near the throat, for the heart is very subtle in that place, and you can tell by looking.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know whether it is in the tissue of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the tissue, the patient does not feel too much pain; but if it is in the membrane, they feel violent pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this treatment is applied to the eyes, the patient should be laid on their back with their head elevated; then incise the abscess, and apply the cautery which is similar in shape to a needle, for that is how the disease presents itself.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize with the cautery until the wart is burned, and reaches down to the nerve, until all the pain is gone; afterwards treat according to the treatment of wounds until it is healed; and one should not use this cautery on any wound except one who has studied long in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have sometimes been cured.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore he can work confidently, and in any case it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the cautery for pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should make cauteries on pleurisy with roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: take a long root of aristolochia, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and as thick and as long as your finger; moisten it in oil, and heat it in the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the throat and the collarbone, and two small cauteries slightly lower down on the part which is under the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, bending a little backwards; and one cautery in the armpit, and another over the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on the two sides of the foot below the cautery that is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand at all, but do it gently as if you were using a perfume.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And some ancient authorities say that a man should use an iron cautery like a razor, heat it and place it between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess; and if there is pain, as we have said in the case of the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this procedure there is fear or death to the patient, or a fistula occurs which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouth with what we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not help, then there are three ways of cauterizing that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of these two methods, one is to make three or four cauteries along the length of the wart, according to the size of the cautery we have described earlier; do not press your hand down on the entire cautery, and let the patient lie on their stomach; the other method of cautery is to heat the cautery with two wires, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; lift the skin where the wart or the pain comes from towards the left, and let the elevation at which you lift the skin follow the natural curve of the body, and let the cautery follow the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	Then push the two wires through until they emerge from the other side, and then pull out the cautery, and so you will have four cauteries. If you see fit, cauterize all of the cautery with three wires.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the sore has healed for a long time, and it is better than the others among the sores mentioned earlier.
de ydropisie	of dropsyThe following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	A cautery is not effective for this type of wound, except in the manner that is called "asclytes.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	If you have treated it according to the methods we have described in sections, and your treatment is not effective, then you should perform IIII cauteries around the armpit, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the breast, two behind the back on the spine, and one in the groin; and the cautery should be close to the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	Afterwards, let the cautery remain open to ooze pus for a long time, and do not stop the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the two intentions will come together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly should be the key that we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is shown here before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet of one with dropsy are swollen and filled with yellow water, you should cauterize between the little toe and the ring finger on the top of the foot; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning it.Si li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply with the awl, thus pushing against the citrine, and the cautery should be according to this shape:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	Afterwards, make 2 cauteries on each leg at the base of the toe nail; and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other above, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries uncovered for a long time without curing, until the water comes out; after that, cure the others that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When an abdominal hernia comes from coldness and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by any means of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with great strength, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before regarding the cautery on the stomach, using the circulating cautery; and four cauteries around the abdomen with a subtle cautery needle throughout, one cautery needle subtle, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, then make cautery on the shoulder, and one cautery on each hip, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	on the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are in the anus, one or more, and are old and consist of thick, cold, moist, corrupted humors, and are treated as described above with division, and it is unhelpful, then do cauterization: three cauteries on the spine of the back, pushing against the citrine, and cauterize according to this shape: two cauteries under the belly button, and if you think the stomach is cold, and the food is not digested, and one can see swelling in the face, then do a large cautery on the stomach as described earlier, and another on the liver, and another on the mice with all cauteries clave; and leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the wound has healed, treat the area until it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is called "thelul."
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut the "thelul," heat the cautery which resembles a razor, and then place it completely ablaze on the cut "thelul"; hold your hand so that the cautery reaches the base of the vein, causing the blood to clot; do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of "thelul," cauterize each one as we have described. After that, cure them with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the scrotum, it will provide greater relief.
de plaie mal curee	of poorly cured wounds
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will discuss in its place, then such a disease comes that it cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is a fistula, and it becomes swollen and oozes pus and corrupted moisture, then you should test it with a thin needle, and be careful to know how deep the needle goes.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	Then heat the cautery iron until it is red-hot, and insert it into the fistula according to how deep the needle went, and repeat the cautery once or twice, or even three times, depending on the amount needed; and be careful not to burn any nerves or large veins.Apres que tu as ars le cors corrumpus, et que li nerfs sunt guariz, tu prends la tenture de la lagne et le mets sus la fistule tant qu’il sea covert; et si le doies descovrir, remets le, tant qu’il sea guaris.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	if the fistula goes to the bladder and intestines, then guard against these places, and do not make fires in fleshy places, and believe that they are not perishing; after curing the place until it is healed, and if the opening is suppurating and the matter has been discharged for a long time, then know that the opening is completely healed; and if the matter is not discharged, know that the opening is obstructed and the bone at the bottom is ruined; and thus, as one of those we will say in their place.
de la maladie des reins	of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When cold pain comes to the kidneys, and there are strong windings, and it does not take a woman's breath, then you should apply cautery to the kidneys on one side and the other with the claw-like cautery that we mentioned earlier. And if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will provide greater relief.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, and the patient retains urine, then he should be cauterized in the area above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic hairline begin, one on each side, and each cautery should be as long as the tip of a finger. And he should also have a cautery below the back, two if necessary; and the cauteries should be curved as described before.
de la marris	of the marrow
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms are delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: then one should do three cauteries around the womb, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries below the back; and the cauteries should be curved, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous humors descend to the socket of the hip, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and if the site of the dislocation is found to be hollow, then you should cauterize the joint on the socket of the hip with a cautery resembling a circle, and mark around the socket as it turns, so that the socket is within the circle; and the cautery should be such as that used for cauterizing the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not available to you, make three large cauteries from the olive, and let the cautery be as deep as all the others; and treat it until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip joint, it is caused by cold and moisture, and the disease is cured by what we have said in the division, but the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the disease of the gross humors with stinking pills, or other good-smelling pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After that, make a cautery; and the manner of the cautery is according to two manners: namely, together with burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is according to many manners, of which one is such: that you cauterize on the hip joint three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make a deep and large hole, and there is between each cautery a space the thickness of a thumb, and the cauteries are olive-shaped; sometimes a cautery is made in the middle on the head of the hip, so that there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you wish, let him be cauterized with the circular cautery which we mentioned earlier in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circles contain the entire hip, and all the thickness of the heart is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is how one does it with sciatica, when the pain stays in the hip and doesn't extend to the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it extends to the thigh and leg, make two cauteries where the pain is located, and a third cautery above the ankle on the left side a little; and let the cauteries be with a knife, and burn the thickness of the skin; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to one or both feet, or near there, cauterize where he feels the pain in three or four places with the instrument called "points.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if necessary, do more; and if he feels the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, do cauterization with a blade or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauterizations that you don't leave the cautery on so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you don't cause the patient more harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I have seen many who have cauterized the ankle of the foot and left it so long that the leg was completely swollen, and the foot as well, and then the feet were pierced and rotten all over.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a disease of the stomach from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, do cauterization in one and then the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And to the wise men they said about the cauterization of the hip, from which there is this manner, make the iron and have it at the end as thick as a thumbnail, or a little less, and have it split into tines and have it from one tine to the other the quantity of a thumb joint; and have the tines on both sides, and also like thumbs, and have a good handle made of iron; and this is its form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is all red and dripping hot, and then place it on the box of the ill hip, and let it be turned to the healthy side; and cauterize once with one cautery and leave it for three days; and then make an ointment of butter, and let the wound remain open for a long time; after the cure of anointing until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasis says that we use this cautery sparingly due to the fear of its appearance, and see few who use it; yet it is one of the good cauteries that can be endured by him who receives it, and where it is applied.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cauteries of medicine burn if you make the instrument to intertwine in such a way that the edge of the door descends, and it is made of brass or iron with one side long, and at the top it has two protrusions, and between each there is the thickness of a thumb; and they are open below and above, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After place the box of the hip on the patient lying on his sound side, and press your hand strongly on the box of the hip; after pour between the two circles of the hot ash which is heated in the fire for a moment, and let the patient endure the heat and burning for an hour.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For he will find biting as from fire; and when the biting is past, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip gently, and let it be so for three days, and place butter on it until the blackness of the scorching is removed; and leave it for three days until pus emerges; and that would be the last aid after the treatment of ointments until he is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, do to them the instrument that dyes awe according to what you have done in the hip joint; and that is the way of hot awe, and I have written it in the treatise on the rectification of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, as much of each, and grind them together and put them into a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	In that pot, make a small hole so that the point of a sharp stick can enter; and place over that pot another pot well sealed, and put on top of the alkali and quicklime an awl, as before, until it has been well heated in your hand; and let it be thus until the awl gives off water and drops into the sealed pot. Then take all that awe, and pour it over the alkali and quicklime as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then if there is great pain, it should be treated with various medical procedures and cauteries of other limbs; for it does evil work like fire, and also with other medicines such as honey, aniseed, and chalk mixed with soap, which are used to cauterize the hip joint.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a treatment where a man was cured of hip and sciatic pain, and he praised it highly, saying that no other treatment was used except this one, which he performed once, and the man was healed immediately afterwards, and he took only one bath as instructed by him below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	He describes how to prepare the litargire: take it fresh and dry, and grind it with a little fat, and apply it to the hip, thigh and leg where the pain is located; then leave it for three hours until the pain no longer feels burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then let him enter the bath until his body is somewhat warmed, and let him enter the bed, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such medicine after an enema.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat dung, it helps a lot; and the cautery must be performed in such a way:
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take lamb's wool and grease it with old oil, and place it on the socket between the big toe of the foot and the one next to it, which is called the 'foscile'.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After that, take dry goat dung and heat it to charcoal in the fire, then place it on the lamb's wool and leave it until it burns out. Repeat this process until you feel through touch that it has reached up to the hip and the pain is gone; and this cautery method is called 'goat cautery'.
de la dolor dou dos	from the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes in the back, from falling or from impact or from excessive evacuation, or from similar appearances of cold matter, none of these appearances are helped by cauterization except that which comes from diffusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary, after the patient has been purged of foul pills or other similar substances, that one make upon his back, where the pain resides, three lines marked with ink, and in each line .v. cauteries or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cautery should be performed according to the cautery which is called "point"; and if you see fit, make .iiij. cauteries or .viij. with the medio-calid cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this illness comes to young children, and the signs of its onset are that they wake up at night in a panic and fear; you will also find it in the lower spine, and on us it appears above the other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see it, treat it with a cautery of celandine according to this method:
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the purple cautery equally affects every part of the spine.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery 2 or 3 lines apart, and have the points close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	Afterwards dress the site until it is healed according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply cautery in a swollen area which is over a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	And if you see the pain in the lower spine between the vertebrae and the ribs, as long as it is in the lower spine, treat it with a cautery of celandine according to the method we have described; because this vertebra is weaker than the others.
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain is caused by moistors that are expanded in each member of the body, and when pain comes from the feet, which they properly call "podagra", and when it is from a cold cause and cannot be cured by medicine, then it can be cured by cautery in this way: make the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive oil according to this formula:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is a need to prick on the sole of the foot, do cauterization with all the cautery that one calls «point».
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and that happens many times, do cauterization on each knee with 3 or 4 cauteries of each part, with all olive oil cautery; and if you need more, do more, but do not hold your hand there longer than until the skin of the heart is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and back, administer to him the cautery which we have described in his chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, then prick around the wrist two lines; and if the pain remains in both arms, then prick on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the armpits or shoulders, cauterize each part, and make good treatment for the patient and take medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you make good treatment for him and purge his phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rutting of the syphilis
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When rut comes in the armpits, and the testicles descend into the scrotum, which is new, then when you see it being cured, he should not eat that day; and he should use things that loosen the belly so that the farts come out of his belly; after that, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his armpit until the testicles are repaired, and bring them up to your fingers, and sign underneath the rut on the bone of the arm, and all over a mark that is similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery with which this form is made:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it becomes white and soft.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bones to their place; and have the patient hold his hand so that it does not return; and work the thighs for the patient, and put a pillow and a servant under the thighs, and another under the foot which holds the hand; then put the cautery on the sign all over your hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, do it again until you reach the bone; and be careful that the blood does not flow when you do the cautery; so that you do not burn him, and so that through this the patient does not die, or other evils.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And the cautery for children should be subtle according to the size of their ears, and for adults as large according to their size; after three days dress the site of the cautery with butter until the scorch is healed; then dress it with other ointments until it is healed, and have the patient lie on his back for forty days so that the wound can heal well; and the bandages should be left on for a long time so that the scabs do not break when he bends to enter rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wants to get up, if a well-made splint is provided for him, and he wears it for another forty days, and has good rest, eats and drinks little, and avoids too much laughter; and if he follows these instructions, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will tell you now about the treatment for cutting on the shoulder.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture in the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ulcers come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they are not growing anymore, do the cautery with a hot iron according to its size, burning it one third deep; then treat it as we have said. And some of the ancients say that it must be cauterized with an iron with three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But first mark the site with ink and draw a line along the width of the ulcer, and another from above, and hold your hand steady over the entire cauterized area.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and milder.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in a limb, from falling or injury, and the pain lasts a long time, and medical treatment doesn't help, then it must be cauterized with an iron called "a point", and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb, its smallness and weakness, and its torture and pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; if not, do another cautery on top of it, for such is the custom that it should move in the member nearest to it, so you must do the cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	of mixing
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The ulcers are sometimes helped by cautery with great difficulty, and especially the diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	When you see it is cauterized, pay attention if the disease is in its early stages, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not spread or persist, and you doubt that the putrefaction may spread throughout the disease, then do five cauteries on the head: one in the middle of the forehead, and one towards the front at the end of the hairline; and two on the sides, and one behind on the nape of the neck; and hold your hand so that the cautery reaches the bone, and so that the blisters come out so that the vapors of the gross humors can escape; and cauterize the mouse according to its appearance.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the infection is scattered everywhere; and it is obviously losing ground, then you should cauterize it with these cauteries that we have mentioned on the head, and one cautery in the nose, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large cautery on the croup and another smaller one, and two cauteries on the two shoulders; and two cauteries on the elbows, and two cauteries on the tendons of the feet, and one cautery on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and be careful of the nerves that are on the back of the heel so that you do not burn them; and sometimes a cautery is done on the bone of the wrist, and another on the bone of the stomach, and one more on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more you do cauterization, the more it helps and moves him; and know that the patient does not feel pain from cautery as the healthy person feels it, because the body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	Afterwards clean the site with wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes to a member and is cured by remedies, oils, and poultices, but it is not healed, then he should be cauterized on the member according to the size of the member; and the cautery should be slightly inside the thickness of the skin; then cure with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes cautery is done to the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that paralyzes the limb, and thus the swelling is removed; and yet no one should attempt this unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves moving through the body.
de albaras	of albaria
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaria" appears, and medicine does not help, then cauterize it with a moderately deep cautery, according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed and its color changed; then treat it with an ointment made from equal parts of linseed and lentil flour, rose oil, and plantain leaves, plus blood from a black hen and blood from an almond tree. Mix everything together and apply it to the affected area, keeping it in place until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of cancer by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a ulcer appears at its beginning, and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with a cautery that is shaped like a circle, all around the edge of the ulcer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And yet the wise say that one should also do cautery in the middle of the ulcer; and yet this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will be burned and damaged, and I have indeed seen this happen sometimes; and a more sure thing is that it is cauterized around the edge, with a cautery called a "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot heal
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called 'adubelati', and it is slow to die, either due to the excess that it produces or because of the age of the patient when they are decrepit (that is, too old), and they have little blood, or because of the time; and you see them hastening to die: therefore cauterize them around with many small cauteries while piercing; afterwards leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten death.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing all the way through, then heat the cautery from which its form comes:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of that disease which is called 'adubelati' as long as the cauteries have pierced the skin, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels them driving out in such a way that the course of the pus is relieved.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Afterwards, treat it until it is perfectly healed.Et li corps qui fu de la dislocation est grantement debile, et il doit être confortez par la dietrique; car ceste maladie est grantement perilleuse.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cautery with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	There is another kind of illness called "corroding", which is nothing other than gangrene of a limb, for it eats away at the limbs just as fire consumes dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this illness in a place that can endure fire cautery, then heat the cauteries, small and large according to what is appropriate for the location of the illness; after cauterizing it completely all over until you have removed all the corruption, so that nothing corrupted remains but only healthy flesh.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for 3 days, and place soft bandages soaked in oil over the cauterized areas until the burns from the fire are healed and all the corruption is gone.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After that, treat the wounds with ointments that generate heat.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if after 3 days you see that healthy flesh has not appeared, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains of the corrupted areas.Et si aprés III jors tu veis que le membre encores est char, et que li maux n’est pas osté, adonques met un oingnem qui engendre fridur, et li fai durir; car en ce cas il doit aler a fin; et si non, covient que tu rencomence le cautere.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this malady is sometimes cured by medicine instead of fire cautery; but nonetheless, fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already described the cure for medicine ague in the division: take the amount you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of sores that appear on the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that from the feet, due to their use, a disease arises which is called "clots" according to our understanding, and is a large hardened lump that bursts the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And there are two ways of performing cautery for this disease.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	Namely: fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is performed by heating the cautery iron as hot as a cooking spit, and made of good iron to the size that it can cover the clot all around, with thin edges; then you apply it hot to the clot and turn your hand around the clot until it reaches the bottom of the clot; leave it thus for three days until pus begins to flow; then make an ointment of wild mallows, and leave the ointment on overnight, and the clot will fall off and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then clean the wound with a soothing ointment until it heals.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they turn away from the body and occur many times in hands and feet, you should administer hot water cautery; it is performed in this way: take an iron or copper rod, or a pen with a sharp point, and place it on the nail and the nail bed, that is, on warts; then place the rod so that it covers the entire area, and pour some hot water onto it, holding your hand steady and pressing your hand as you rotate the rod so that its edge comes to the root of the nail, enabling the hot water to penetrate deeply to the root. Let the patient endure the burning sensation for a while; then leave it as it is, and it will be uprooted completely at its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another, until you draw out all those in the body, then cleanse the wounds that engender pus.
li cure dou trembler	the cure for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone is shaking from the coldness of their nerves, or from quartan fever or other [illness], you should make 4 or 5 cauteries on the spine in the back, one cautery between each spinous process; and one cautery on the penis, and one over the stomach with an olive-oil cautery; it will stop the shaking and hasten the healing from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of foul pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes they appear as various sores on the body, or as foul pustules, which come from putrid humors.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If necessary, when they first appear, one should make a cautery on the top of each pustule: a fine cautery made from myrtle wood, whose tip is taken from the fire, or from long aristo logic root, or with a lens-shaped cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning as described above, and they cannot grow any further, but the superfluities from which they come are broken up, and they are healed; but this must be done after the evacuation of blood.Et aucune fois il covient les percer ou fendre, et puis cauterizer, selonc qu’il est dit sus, ou par chescune pustule, et aler a la fende: si qu’ele soit desrompue, et le mal soit en parte remédié.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	There are many times great flowings of blood from the artery which is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cautery on the limb, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to stanch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And nonetheless, when this happens to someone, you must hurry to place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it very tightly so that the blood is quietened beneath your finger and no drop issues forth; then prepare several olive-wood cauteries, small and large according to the wound and the location where the artery is severed, and place the cautery upon that vein where you are holding your finger, and keep it there until the bleeding is staunched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it bleeds afresh when you lift your finger from the wound and the cautery goes out, then quickly take another of the cauteries which are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to apply these one after the other until the bleeding is staunched; and be careful not to harm the nerve which lies nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be well-staunched by itself when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods we have described: by cautery, or by extraction if it is not treated, or by strong ligature with thread, or by medicines placed upon it which have the power to staunch blood; and it should be bound and pressed firmly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers a tightening of bandages or placing hot things on it, or similar things, will not help much if at all.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to someone and there is no medicine or surgeon present, then one should put their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and tighten it well above the wound and above the vein; and move it not, but moisten it with cold water often so that the blood may become congealed and thickened and tightened; and make inquiries meanwhile about what he needs for cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of treatments for wounds.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about all the diseases that require cauterization with fire, or with burning medicines, and the wounds and causes, and the instruments and forms of cauteries; and I went through that chapter from head to toe, and I will go through this one in the same way so that one can more easily find what they are looking for.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so that I begin this, my dear son, you must learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and because of this it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to embark on folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many types of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	if they come from such who are so filled with their illness that they will soon die from the fury of their disease, and from the greatness of their wickedness; and one must fear these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And there are those who give you their sense, and say: "wait, I am healed"; and the disease is stubborn.Et il doit on avoir paor, car plusors fois il se veult aler par un sens et revener par l’auter; et la mort li vient adessou.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	You should not consent to those who come to you with this way, but put more confidence in your honor than in your desire. Do not open foolishly but wisely what you are certain of and from which you can get gain and profit; and use prognosis and indication in the cures of your illnesses so that health may be turned toward safety. That will help you to this good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and righteousness, and if you want to be inspired by the holy breath of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have instructed you in this chapter by speaking about chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cauteries, which I have described to you from the head to the feet, so that you may more easily find what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Do you know that this disease often comes to infants when they are born, and when the birth canal is too narrow for the child; and sometimes it comes from a cause that we do not know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	I have never seen this disease in adults, and in all cases I have observed, death has resulted; therefore, it seems best to me to leave the treatment for another day.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	I saw a child whose head was swollen with fluid, and the swelling increased every day until it could no longer support itself; and the fluid was so abundant that it reached up to the brain, between the brain and bone, and the treatment for this is such that if the fluid is between the brain and bone and the abscess is small, you should make a large incision in the head, as wide as two fingers, until all the fluid has drained; and here is how you will identify spatulum:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the swelling is deeper and the abscess larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, like this:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the fluid is under the bone and you see the creases of the scalp opening in all directions, and the fluid drains out when you press on it with your hand, and this does not alleviate the condition, then you must make three incisions in the head in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, draw out all the moisture forcefully.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Afterward, bind the cuts with bandages and powders, and put in wine and oil, and leave it thus until the fifth day; then loosen it, and cure the wound by tenting and by ointments, and let the head be extracted likewise. Provide the patient with dry meat free of moisture as food until the limb is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look at where the size of the abscess opens, and the gathering of the pus; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut therefore where the abscess opens, and where the pus gathers, and open it according to what you can; and beware that you do not cut the artery, and let blood flow, so that the patient dies from bleeding and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of gout
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to someone that they have a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or feet, and the disease is old, and the medicine does not help, then the final treatment is cauterization with which one will cut the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	When you see them bend over, let the patient lean back; then rub the nape of the neck with an abrasive cloth until the arteries stand out, then hold the patient's neck steady with both hands; then look where the vein beats, and its pulse is felt after the ears, and they are pressed down; then sign the pulse, then press both sides with a sharp spatulum, two parts deep to the bone, and this should be done from the back of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, push the spatulum under the artery and cut it from above, slicing as deep as two beans across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, the blood will jump out continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not stand out or pulse, then you must measure the space of three fingers deep, then sign and cut to the bone; and this should be done for the blood to flow out at six parts, and perhaps a little more or less depending on what the patient can endure, and the pulsation of the artery; then examine the wound: if there remains anything on the bone, cut it out so that hot abscesses do not come, then hold the wound open and cleanse it with ointment until it heals.
de emigrainne	of emetics
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old-age dementia comes, and there is catarrh, due to moisture from tears, and heat in the temples, and old-age forgetfulness, and similar things, and it is not helped by remedies through methods of medicine, then we must cut into the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of its extraction is that the patient pulls back the hair from his temples, and feels for the artery in the temple, which pulses strongly, especially in those who are too cold; and if it is not pulsing strongly, the patient should hold a warm water-soaked cloth to the area until it does. Then take the spatulum, of which there is a description below:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	then lightly scorch the skin until you reach the artery, then pull it upwards with tweezers, and carefully separate it from the tissues underneath in each part; and if the artery is delicate, return it to the tip of the nail, then cup that part according to the quantity of the two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cupped, the blood will not flow throughout the body.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out the blood from 1/4 to 3/8 of an inch; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread so that pus does not come before the wound heals, and that blood comes out freely; then cut off the excess between the two ligatures in the same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a hot-iron knife up to the bone until the shoulders are cut; and this is the main course of treatment if the patient does not have a fever and is of a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cautery helps to dry up moisture, that is why it is of greater help for moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the site with old cotton and places it on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, they should be healed with dry medicines that cause scabs to form, and with bandages until they are healed; and if without cutting through the artery as much as you operate, you hasten to cover it by cauterizing, or you employ vitriol and strain it in your hand so that the blood is stained; and if you do not have that present, you place your finger on the site so that the blood congeals, and wet the site with cold water until the bleeding stops, and bind it as it should be; and what is better and easier for the extraction of an artery is to cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery of two parts, but the cutter should be quite thick in order to retain its heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the body is too weak, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And there should be between the two knives a distance of one finger's width, and then when you have cut through both sides, you place the hot iron over it until it reaches the bone, and you close the vein in two places; and the two heads should be separated because they are not fused by this cautery from top to bottom; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When tears are flowing from the veins that are above the testes in the head, and it does not help to use medicine on it, and you see the face of the patient turn red, and he feels heat or burning in his forehead, and his eyes are weak and moist so that the hair of his eyelashes has fallen out, and the eyelids are scorched by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called it "curing by contusion" in the old days, and you should do this to the patient who has this disease: let him grow hair on his forehead, then make three incisions on his forehead evenly according to the length of his forehead; and one of the incisions should be as long as two fingers right in the middle of his forehead, going down towards the nose, and the other two on either side of his eyes, above the eyebrows; and be careful not to cut into the arteries that are on either side of the eyes; and keep your hand away from the base of the jaw, and let each wound be as long as three fingers across, going through the joint; and have a piece of sponge and some gauze ready to soak up the blood, then insert the spatulum into both sides where the lump is:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision which is towards the temple all the way to the second incision; and burn all the skin which is between the two cuts up to the bone, then do the same from the middle incision to the other second one, and then remove this spatumile.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you pour into the first cut the instrument which is called  "culter", and is very sharp on one side, and not sharp at all on the other, and this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the knife blade toward the chest cavity, the handle toward the bone, and cut until you reach the middle of the split.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous to what opens in the chest, and then make another incision in the middle split to the other side; then draw out the blood equally, and express the place for the blood extracted; then insert a tent of old cotton into each split, and apply wet cloths soaked in wine and oil and garlic, and guard against hot abscesses coming there; and on the third day loosen the ligature, and administer copious drinks of warm water, then treat it with basilicon ointment with rosemary oil, and other remedies for wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	from the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When someone has a constant runny nose, and you see the eyes are pale and sunken, and the vision is weak, and the eyelids are burned, and the hair falls out, and in the head there is pain, and the patient sneezes; then know from these symptoms that these materials and this catarrh come from many veins, and the medicine that cures it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you command the patient to look back at his forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another from the hairline to the corner of the eye.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begin from the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move upon eating; and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then pull back between the two lips of the wound and put in old cotton, and bandages of linen; then bind over wet cloths soaked in wine and oil, and beware of hot abscesses; when it is removed, you must rub the bone until pus begins to form, then treat it with dried substances that promote pus formation.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In the same way: take two parts of flour of wheat, and four parts of colophony, and make a poultice; and administer it to these wounds to promote the formation of new skin throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of earache
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of four things: grains, or animals, or stone, or similar objects like iron; or seeds, such as peas, beans, and peas; or flowing substances, such as water and garlic, and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it falls into the ear stone or any other object that does not adhere to the ear or grow in the ear, then put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, then drop some oil of violets or oil of sisamen, and then bring about extraction; and let him sneeze with a condiment, and stop up his nostrils when sneezing comes on, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and let the ear remain raised.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Fever often comes out through this treatment; and if it does not come out, then a subtle pair of tweezers are used to extract it, and this is its shape:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out with tweezers, that is good; if not, administer extraction with a fine needle of small diameter; and if it does not come out through this, make an iron hook and insert the tip of the hook into the ear canal firmly, and stop the space around the hook with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the hook; then pull it out directly, for often it comes out in this manner as we have said; and if it does not come out in such a way, take some glue and place it on something pointed suitable for this purpose, and put a piece of cotton around it; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not come out with all the things we have mentioned, then be quick to split the ear so that the abscess and pain subside, and the method of splitting is that you first bleed the patient's head and extract blood according to its strength, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small split in the root of the ear at the fatty tissue where it depends; and the split should be like a crescent moon, so that you can reach the stone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck it energetically with your mouth; and treat it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if there are grains within it and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot issue out, then administer a .i. spatumile tenve subtle according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and an incision is made on that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think that the grains are moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract it with subtle tweezers and a sucking device, as we have said, so that the extraction is easy.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case of water falling into the ear, the patient should use a first-grade sneezing remedy, and pack the ear with old cotton.Car en la piere est grant dolour; et si li maux ne fu par la piere, il fu par le foc ou par l’aygue, si que en li remede de celuy maux li membres ne pot demorer ains qu’il fu eslongiez ou disloiez.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let him lie on the same ear where there is the pain.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps out through the skin, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, he should take many small stones according to the length of your fingers and heat them gently in the fire. Then put one end of the stone into the ear, and let it come out from another part of his foot; and press down with another stone on the stone which is in the ear. And do not cease doing this with the stones until all the fluid is gone, and so it will all come out. If you see that, he should take a straw, and insert one end into the ear, and heat the other end in the fire until the sharpest straw is burnt; then do the same again with other straws until all the fluid has gone out as we have said regarding the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of an object from the ear, if it is a small object, such as a louse or something similar, treat it as we have said in the previous section. But if it is a large object that can be felt, administer extraction with tweezers; and it is the easiest thing to remove what is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	When extracting worms from the ears, if you treat it as we have described in the section on distilleries, and the treatment does not help, then you should examine the ear in the sun; if any worms appear, you should pluck them out with a pair of delicate tweezers. If none appear, take a piece of wool from where they are formed.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	It is narrow at the bottom and wide at the top.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Then insert the thinnest end of the needle into the ear according to the amount of pain the patient is experiencing, then suck gently on the needle; do this repeatedly until all the pus comes out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not come out, then pack the ear with cotton as I have said in the case of stones; and if they do not come out as we have described, then administer distillations which the ancients have tried for worm-fighting, and you will find them in the section on distillation treatments; and distil your oils and medicines into the ear using this implement, and make the shape as I have shown you:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it is made of silver or brass with a narrow end having one small hole and a wider top for distillation; to press the distillation into this instrument, use a well-crafted brass tool, and if you see fit, take a razor and wrap the tip with cotton; then pour in your oil or juice, and what remedies you wish from your medicines into the wool, and let the wool be in the ear; then insert the razor over all the cotton, and gently press your hand so that the oil is distilled into the ear; and the patient will feel it inside, and the distillation should be slightly warmed by fire so that it is not too cold when distilled into the ear.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of earache
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without an opening in their ears; and this same thing happens to men due to earache, or an injury inside the ear. Sometimes these openings occur in the ear itself, so that one cannot see them; and sometimes there is a small wound at the opening of the ear, which can be seen clearly.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, when the opening occurs and is not visible, it is due to a grievous wound in various parts, and in such cases one should hold the affected ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the membrane exposed, then examine it closely to understand its shape.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And it should be sharp and pointy at the front and back, so that it does not cut or injure the ear; if the membrane is due to a wound in the body of the ear, then grasp it with fine tweezers and gently peel away this wound.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the growth is deep in the ear, then take a thin, lightweight razor and heat it slightly in the fire, then apply it to the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the itching that the sick person feels when he hears it, pierce slightly and be careful not to damage the ear nerves; then put a tent in the ear according to the size of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this for several days until the wound is closed; then take a tent and moisten it with rosewater, and sprinkle powdered vitriol on it; and if you see swelling in the ear, it is appropriate to pull out the tent and move another tent moistened with cerot made from rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then treat it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, soak a sponge and cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding that are in the remedies for distillations.
de la char des papieres	from the char of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This herb when it comes in papers of itself when they are moist and are dry, you must extend them with tweezers and pincers, and the root of a spatula; then put ground vitriol on the spot.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without peeling, then cauterize it with a thin lenticular cautery, and the cauterizer after the incision heals scabs; and many times they return, as long as something remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of hail
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times they come out of the ears things that look like grains in appearance and hardness, and because of this disease is called "hail," and it is a collection of moisture thick on top and bottom; the treatment is such: if the hail moves from one side to another, and it is an easy thing to know, cut it open at the sides, then peel off each part slightly, then take it with tweezers, and crush it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	if you cannot crush it without piercing the paper, do not worry about hurting the patient; and if the slit is large, sew it up, and treat it until it is healed; and if it is small, do not force it, for the ointment will heal it right away and cause no harm.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hailstone is descending into the ear towards the upper part, then invert the paper, and grip the hailstone with pincers, and squeeze it from both sides; and if the paper is removed by the incision, that does not matter; and when the hailstone is crushed, apply a poultice of salted water, and clean the wound of any foreign matter until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that is woven into the papers above, and this happens more to children than to adults, and severely to themselves, and they get the catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears hasten to them; and because they lie on their faces, and sleep on top, and their papers are under their eyelids moistened that the inflammation and appearance have covered with exinach which opens in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the area with your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient places his head on the operator's lap; and then take 1 linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that the exinach occupies in each part, and then place it over the eye; and press with your fingers on both sides so that the exinach gathers within the circle; then cut through the moist skin with a spatula, making an incision no larger than the wound made when opening a vein; and in various cases, the exinach comes out of the incision in the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Take therefore a piece of cloth and hold it between your fingers and thumb, and twist your hand from right to left until it is taut; and be careful not to push into the fissure so that you do not go all the way to the eye, lest you blister it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the skin opens at the beginning of the fissure, gently spread the fissure slightly so that it appears; then extract as we have said, then moisten cloth in vinegar and water, and place on the area, and draw out with a bandage.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such people who grind seal and place it on to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the eye until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there comes a hot abscess on the area, then treat it with soothing poultices until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	of hair of parchment
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow from papers other than their natural place, and they are enveillit, they harm themselves and bring on various diseases, just as tears, softening of the paper, and albugine, until it leads to their destruction; and there are four ways to treat this: through cauterization with fire, or with a medicine water according to what is mentioned before the chapter on cauterization, and either through incision and stitching or through splints, as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You should place the head of the patient in your lap, then hold the paper of the eye in your left hand; if it turns, that is good; if not, then thread a needle with .i. thread; and this should be done from the edge of the paper where the hairs are growing, and draw .i. thread over the entire paper, and return to the razor; then cut into the part under the paper, under the awkward hairs, to the spatumile, copant, from the large larmier to the small one; then remove the thread and place a small tent of cotton and cloth underneath the paper, then sign over the paper a figure of an inch, like a fuelle of mirte, and still it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity you see rising up in every part.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if one has the need, they should apply a large quantity of paper according to how soft the paper is; then make the stich along the two lines that you have marked, and start from the larger wound down to the smaller; and let one of the slits be near the natural hair, in the thickness of a root, then tie the thread in one of the two corners of the heart, then cut it all around; then join the two lips with a single stitch of fine woolen thread using a needle, and wipe away the blood, and let the excess threads dry on the two edges as you see fit; and if not, pay it no heed, then leave the stitch and threads for three or four days; then cure the wound without stitches using dry and constricting things, for the paper will adhere to the wound as it heals, but the stitches are harmful (as the ancients say), and this is a job without fear; and there is another way: you mark the paper with a shape like the leaf of a myrtle, as we have described, with three pointed lobes according to the form given here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut what is above with small scissors evenly according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the forceps, and the object is not even, then take a needle where it has thread, and pierce it through the middle of the wound; and take another thread alongside the large artery, and the second thread alongside the small one, and bring the threads together evenly between your fingers; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin above which you have marked, as we have described, then bring the two lips of the wound together by stitching, and heal it until it is cured; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerate and similar soothing ointments; and sometimes the hairs of the paper are converted: so you must use what we have said about the incision; but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of the cane is as follows: you must first turn the paper and place it inside according to what I have said, then make two canes by art, and two thin threads as long as the paper and the width of the spathomyle; then tie two pairs of threads where you hold the threads; then join one and the other subtly above what is on top of the paper of the eye, and pull out the two canes from the two formed parts; and let it be thus for some days, and the skin that was stretched will die and harden and fall off, as long as it falls through itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is delayed, and the incision has some strength, then heal it until it is cured; and when the wound is sewn up, and if the paper is raised, and the hairs do not sting anymore; and this is the form of the two cannings that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	the operations are such that you pierce a needle and insert a fine and subtle silk thread; then join the heads and tie them together subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then arrange another fine silk thread in the eye, and tie the end of the thread; then put the patient's head in your hand; and let it be exposed to sunlight so that the operations are declared, for this is a subtle and fine operation, then insert the needle into the root of the hair near the skin, and pierce the paper obliquely until you draw it above the natural hair; then pull out the thread and insert it into the eye of the needle with the natural hair, if there is one or two or three or more; then pull your hand back so that the hairs come out straight through the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the wound is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then you shall treat the wound underneath to the very end that you have prepared for it, until the wound comes out through the opening above and you see it with your eye; then you shall treat the wound and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for 1 or 2 days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh grows over it; and if the hair is short, then accompany it with a long hair from the horse's mane, and let it grow with that one which you leave, until it is elongated and then you remove it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the eyelash
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease called "alacratia" or warts comes in the eye, there are two ways of getting it: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from cutting or cauterizing, and in similar ways.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way to treat it is that you split the sore, and pull back its edges, and put in tents of linen, and leave it until it heals; and you must not use anything in its treatment which would dry and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do that, the disease will return worse than before; but work with softening things, such as fenugreek; and rosewater or altee water, and linseed cooked in some of the oils, and ointments of dissolved diaquilon, and wrap it up in a tent, and treat it thus.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the goal of your treatment is that you take care that it does not heal according to the form that it was before; and these works which we have said are not remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to the form that it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease, which is deep inside, is truly called "axacrati", and it is both natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Accidents come from wounds and cuts and cautery and similar things; the way to treat them is to take a needle with a double thread, and pierce it through the flesh, and make it go out of the left eyebrow so that the thread goes into both sides of the face; then the flesh is pulled up above the needle, and the cup is made very wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the wound returns as it should be, that is good; if not, then take a razor and put it in the cut, and turn the flesh, and make two cuts inside the wound; and let the sides of both cuts be the two angles of the incision you have made, so that when they are stitched together, the shape is like the shape of a letter which has no "I griesche"; then remove this flesh, according to the quantity that its sides are cut under, from what follows the wound, then join the two torn parts and sew them with a thread of wool; then treat it as we have said with softening medicines and bandages until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a split or stitch or cautery, then you should make a plain split underneath the hair of the scalp, and according to what is mentioned above; then unsheathe between the two lips of a tent, as I have said; and the operation should be performed according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise master prepares an instrument with all his power, how he makes the figure return to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what he needs in terms of operation and instruments in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	suddenly from the scalp
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this splitting occurs in the hands of men in such a way that the scalp above is separated from the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you should therefore insert the point of a razor underneath the scalp, and lift it up; and stretch it with tweezers, until you grip what is open to the subtile spatula, which is neither too round nor too sharp, so that the patient cannot bear that the too-sharp spatula pierces the eye; and make your incision, by which you peel away this union, lightly, so that the scalp returns according to its natural shape; and all of this union is healed, and they sometimes create an ulcer in the eye, and raise it with warm water, and with a bandage; then place a tent of linen between the scalp and the eye, and place wet wool on the eye; and after the third day, use the bandage and soothing things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	You should know that the nail comes in two forms: one is nerveous and resembles a hard cyst; the other is not nerveous but resembles congealed white moisture, which, when touched with iron and pinched, cannot be pierced by any means; both kinds begin at the inner corner of the eye, grow little by little, and cover the entire sight, light, and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of incision is that the patient places his head over yours, then he opens his eyes; you hold the piece of paper in your hand, then grip the nail with tweezers at the cuticle and lift it up; next, take a needle, thread a horsehair, or cow's hair, or ox hair through it, double the tip of the needle over, insert it into the nail, tie the nail with a thread, and lift it up; then scrape along the side of the nail that follows the eyelid all the way to the tear gland, being careful to not pierce the tear duct; sometimes, only the cuticle and thread are needed, as mentioned; then scrape along the soft tissue around the tear gland, taking care not to damage the tear duct with the incision.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful not to touch the fleshy membrane and rupture it, nor pierce the tear gland; after the incision, apply a little powdered quicklime to the eye, and a collar made of linseed oil, and leave it on until the next day; then treat it as needed until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot push in the needle, and the hooked pins cannot enter, many times this kind of nail has been cured by medicines; and it heals as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, then work the eye of the malady, and take the spatula gently with a small hook according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And lift the nail gently, and if you see that it does not lessen and the pus continues to come out, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litharge and red collar, and if it is ground, and stop the eye until the next day; then resume the other work according to this same action, until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is no contrary thing in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then treat it with milk, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.Se li ungle est vairons ou si grant, et ne puet gueres estre curé, adonques le tranche selonc la forme de l’ungle, et le traie hors dou pie; puis tache l’ungle s’il est chaut, et met sus dou baume de colofonia et d’uncina de vairons et de pluyer, et le retrempe en l’oil dou mal.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the nail is very large and cannot be cured easily, then cut it according to the shape of the nail, and pull it out from the toe; then burn the nail if it is hot, and put on balsam of colophony and of the nail and of vitriol, and re-drip into the eye of the malady.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows above the eyeball
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	In some men, red pustules sometimes emerge on the eyelids, covering the eyelid and pressing down on the eyelashes; they resemble a rose on a column. The treatment is for the patient to place his head on your lap, then you work on the eyelids, and carefully cut away all the pus to the bone, holding it firmly in place. Then cut through the first pustule, and continue cutting away at the root until the end; be careful not to damage the eye during this process. The incision should be made with a spatulum, as described earlier for the fingernail incision, using gentle pressure to remove the pus, as demonstrated in this chapter. Once the incision is complete and all the pus has been removed, apply oil of sea-holly or distil red vitriol and similar corrosive medicines onto the eye; then place a cotton pad soaked in egg white over the eye to secure it and encourage a hot abscess. If nothing remains, and the white part of the eye turns red, indicating a hot abscess, leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with soothing remedies for hot abscesses. Then return to treating the eye until it is healed, and do the same for any other pustules that develop in the eye in this way.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, you should always use the natural method for curing weak eyes, and the accidental method for strong eyes; and do not use your hand in either treatment until you see that this member is suffering from the other treatment.
des voines des eulz	of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Thus are red veins which are covered over the eye, and they obscure one's vision and weaken the eye all day long.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Thus, the first thing you must do is examine the eye to see if it is affected by this condition and there is no other disease present; then have the patient tilt his head back and gently squeeze those veins all along their length according to your judgment, taking care to use a gentle touch.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And massage in circles going downward on one side of the eye according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then press those veins gently, and draw out the blood little by little, hour after hour, until you see the veins drawn away from the eye; but be careful not to hurt the eye with the points of your fingers, and do this work at noon in the sunlight, and be very diligent in your task so that you do not leave any of the veins untouched. And when you have finished, instil a mixture of green and red collyrium into the eye to purify what remains of the redness.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you do not have the power to pull out all of this in that hour, then make a plaster over the eye with things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and let it be for several days until the pain is appeased and assured of a hot abscess; then begin again according to the manner set forth above until he is healed; and that is the form of strength:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the eye fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	Look carefully at the "arissati" fistula: when you heal it with cautery and medicine with a hot fire according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, there is an issue in it that you split open over the abscess, where it should remain, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed and you will see the corruption and blackness, then you will use the instrument again, of which there is the form; and it is called a  "aspre chief", and it should be made to be sharp at one end, and punctured like a file as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it over the site of the corrupt bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand slightly until you feel that the corruption has been removed; do this a few times, then restore the site with drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the eye is cured, and there are no other signs of illness apart from the fistula, then you should simply treat it according to the instructions given earlier in this text; but if there are other issues, or if the fistula persists for 40 days without healing, causing discomfort, then you must operate a second time with an iron instrument and sharp medicines; when the eye is open again, insert the iron tool gently as described before, making sure the iron has three angles, and the shaft is thinned at the end so that it can reach the eye easily:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then he puts it on the bone of the ear, and pulls his hand away from the eye a little, then returns to press the bore all the way through the bone until he feels the patient's pulse through it; and then he packs the wound with dry medicine as I have taught you, and when the flesh heals and hardens, he inspects the pulse in the hand; this is an easier procedure for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the opening of the eye:
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are fully open all around and there is no disturbance to the eye or diminution, then you should ligature the patient; then heal, then place leeches or suckers without piercing to draw out, then apply a poultice on top made from aconite and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then bind the eye, using bandages and linen; the manner of the linen is that you fold linen very softly, and double each one into four, and then place one on top of another according to the quantity that the eye needs; then bind it tightly from above with a firm bandage, and then restart the leeches to draw out without piercing; then remove the leeches and leave the eye bound day and night, and if the ligature softens, then you should tighten it greatly; then remove the ligature after a day and a night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good; if not, then restart the poultice and the linen and the ligature and the leeches until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	from the rupture of woven fabric
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in woven fabric, then it opens and appears like a grain of resin, and is frightening to see; therefore, if you see it covered, the work is such that you insert a needle into the root of the part below up to the part above, then insert another needle where there is a double thread of the part of the armhole; and pierce it, and leave the first needle according to its position; then cover the place of the double thread and tie one part of the fabric around, and tighten it well, then remove the needle and apply a poultice made from a soft egg yolk on top of the eye; and leave it until the thread breaks with the fabric, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restricted by the fabric in a circle of linen, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes give great pain, then pierce them with a sharp needle which comes from the back of the eye, and dry out the moist white part and lower the eyes, and put them in as far as they will go; then pull on them until they are healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the back of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called «alcunnati» is nothing but a swelling in the eye, resembling descending pus, but it is not pus; and the way to diagnose it is to make the patient sit upright and still, then take his head in your hands and move it until you see the swelling come up to your eyes; then it should be treated, and the light turned away from him so that he can see things as he used to; and if the swelling does not go down, know that it is pus, but if the descending swelling is not as we have described.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you cause the patient to sit between your hands, then take the spatulum and insert it under the horny membrane at the edge of the conjunctiva with the horny membrane and the cornea, until the sac is burst; and when it has been discharged, distill into the eye warm water mixed with honey, or water in which fenugreek and honey have been boiled; then let it be treated with other remedies until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the eye waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have already discussed the appearances of diseases in the division, and what is needed to pierce them; now act according to the patient's condition.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	You should cause the patient to sit between your hands, facing away from the light so that the sun does not hurt his eyes, and then press the healthy eye shut very tightly; then take the paper for the eye in your left hand if the eye is on the left, or in your right hand if it is on the right; then hold in your right hand, if the eye is on the left, the instrument called 'almagda', or in your left hand if the eye is on the right; then place the tip of the instrument alongside the cornea through that white part of the eye where the tear duct emerges, and push the instrument called 'almagda' gently and twist your hand so that it pierces into the white part of the eye, and you will feel the almagda reach the empty space; the depth of the passage of the almagda should be equal to the distance from the pupil to the edge of the iris; this is the cornea of the eye; then you will see the bone through the paper due to the clarity of the horny membrane, and then push the instrument to where the water is, then express it beneath one membrane after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	if the pain comes now, let the patient see the instrument before him.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After rest for a little, if the pain comes again, push out the blood with the instrument, and when it is stuck and does not flow, gently withdraw the almagda by turning your hand a little; then put in a little gem-stone, and remove this from the eye inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then insert into the eye wool or linen moistened in rosewater and an abundance of egg yolk, and bind it with clean bandages.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, put on a poultice of ground comfrey mixed with an abundance of egg yolk.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some people whose eyes are too hard, then you should take the instrument called  "alberit", which has this shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And so the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make the cut fine, then insert the almagda as we have said; and when the treatment is complete, prepare for the patient a dark bed, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and let him be free of all movement, and eat light foods, and do not move his head or to the right or left, and tie him according to his disposition for three days; then untie him in that same dark house, and test his vision, and show him some things, and then put the bandage back on for seven days; and you must not do this during the hour of the treatment or after an incision now, but it is necessary to alleviate this so that the blood flows rapidly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When these eye abscesses arise, you must release the eye before the seventh day and apply a remedy for abscesses; and when it is soothed, then loosen the eyelid and place a gold ring over it to cover any sore, and then keep it in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then exit the house a little at a time, and return to your normal routine; and know that no disciple should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from the Land of Iraq, who told us that in his country they pierce with alum, and suck out the water, but I have never seen anyone doing this in our land, nor have I read about it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the similitudes of the forms of almagest, because those who do not know them may see them; and they are properly made of brass.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let the heads of these be of the same subtlety, and the points in three angles.
de la char sor le neis	through the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	At times, various types of warts grow on the body, some resembling scorpions with many feet; and others have a wart with a hollow center of a dark color, and another type is a wart with a hollow center of a fair color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	For the type of wart that is hollow and not raised, one must have the patient stand between your hands facing the sun; open his nostrils, and pour the oil onto the warts, pulling them out; then apply what you can bear with a thin spatula from one side, until you know the wart has been entirely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	If something remains which cannot be removed, then open it with a sharp instrument lightly so that nothing remains; and if without swelling, or an abscess forms, then lanced as appropriate; and if malignant abscesses form, then hasten to cauterize them until the pus is drained and all the corruption is removed, then apply cold water, or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If it works on the nose and moisture reaches the palate, know that it is healthy; and if moisture does not pass through as it should, know that there is rotten flesh in the bone above, which the instruments cannot reach: therefore you must insert a thick thread of linen, and let it be knotted with our fingers, and let there be between each knot the width of a finger or less; and put the patient's end of the thread into his nose to his ability, and pull it through with scent until it comes out of the nose into the mouth; and children often do this in schools, and it is an easy thing for anyone who wants to do it; then hold the end that comes out of the nose in one hand, and the other end that comes out of the mouth in the other hand, and pull them apart gently while feeling the thread with your fingers.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this until you know that the night has corrupted the flesh, then draw out the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the flesh; and then put a plug of lead into the nose for several days until it is healed, and if he needs dry medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to cleanse the head, with which one distils oils and medicines into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	It should be made of silver or brass, in the shape of an open lamp, like a tube, and with a handle to control it; and if you wish, make a closed tube, and fill it with medicine to cleanse the ears; and there should be a small handle at the end for holding it while heating the oil or any other liquid.
de la char sor le neis	through the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	many times a disease called "telul" arises at the top of the nose; it grows and becomes large, so that it is visible to the eye. Therefore, you should treat it at first, and remove all of it, then place upon it a cautery or burning medicine. If one delays in treating it until it has become large, then be wary if it is hard, dark in color, and insensate: do not touch it with iron, for it is an abscess. For when one treats it, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is due to a superficial touch, not from deep color, and you see that one can completely cover it, then evacuates the patient and treat the site with dry and constricting substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when a solution of continuity comes in any of these cartilage openings, it benefits little except in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore when this happens to anyone, one must look to see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then bring the two lips together with a stitch, then treat it until it is healed; and if the lips are torn on both sides, then you must scrape all parts of their flesh until they heal, then bring the two lips together with a stitch, tighten them, and powder with dragon's blood powder and ground incense; and put a piece of strong plaster or other binding plaster over the powders, leave it to heal by itself, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of sewing is that you assemble the needle: either by needle, as we have said in the sewing of the belly; or by thread, as I have made you aware.
des apostemes des levres	of lip abscesses
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At home on the lips there are hard abscesses, resembling grains of wheat, small and large; therefore you should cut into the lip, and pierce each pustule with pincers, and scrape out each one; then apply powdered vitriol after making an incision, until the blood is stopped; then use a poultice of garlic, and treat the area with dry remedies until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of gum pain
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times a growth arises on the gums, which the ancients call "albus"; you should hold it with tweezers, cut at its root, and let the blood or pus flow out; then place ground vitriol, or other restraining and drying powders, over the site; if the growth returns after the incision, and this often happens, cut it again and cauterize it; if it does not return after cautery, that is the form for treating an abscess.
des sordens	of the ears, and of the eyes, and of the nose, and of the throat, and of the mouth, and of the gums, and of the teeth, and of the tongue, and of the palates, and of the head, and of the brain, and of the neck, and of the collar bones, and of the shoulders, and of the armpits, and of the arms, and of the elbows, and of the wrists, and of the hands, and of the fingers.
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are gathered at the roots of the teeth, in the mouth between the gums, scabs that are unsightly and rough; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and wormy, when corruption comes to the gum, and they stink; so you should make the patient hold his head in your hands, and press his gums with your thumb, and pull the teeth or the scabs until nothing remains; and thus do the same for blackness and greenness, and yellowness and other discoloration, until they are cleaned; and if one pulls out what is at the first cause, that is good; if not, then repeat it again on the second day and the third, until you have pulled everything out; and know that teeth require various forms of instruments for pulling, according to what the work demonstrates, so that the instrument used to pull out teeth have different forms from those used to pull between the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you treat a toothache and draw it out, take as long as you can, for this must not be done quickly; for the tooth is a very sensitive substance until there is no more excuse for drawing it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then, when the patient is forced to pull, you must be certain of the tooth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain torments the patient and believes it is in a sound tooth, and forces the good tooth to be pulled; and yet the pain does not depart from him because of this, as long as the evil tooth remains, for we have already seen this happen with these patients. And when you are quite certain of the decayed tooth, you must scrape around the tooth with a sharp instrument to drive away the gum in every part; then move it with your fingers or with fine tweezers, little by little, until it is well loosened; then grip it firmly with the tweezers. And let the head of the patient be between your knees, and hold him so that he does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	Afterwards, pull out the tooth carefully without breaking it, and if it does not come out, take one of these instruments and insert it into each side gently, then move it as before.And when he has pulled out the tooth, let him stop the bleeding with a piece of sponge or some such thing.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the teeth are pierced and eaten away, you must fill the holes with pieces of cloth, and gently hold them tight with tweezers so they do not break while being held; and it is necessary to work carefully around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be careful that you do not break it and leave a piece behind, for then the pain will be worse due to the root's maliciousness.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And beware of doing as ignorant healers do, who in their haste and arrogance sometimes break the tooth, not heeding what we have told you; but sometimes they bring about a great illness due to the roots that remain, or by breaking the tooth, as we have often seen. And when the tooth is pulled, wash the area with wine or garlic and salt; and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, apply powdered vitriol to the site; and if this does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of instruments with which the teeth are pulled first should have long points and thick handles so they do not break when you pull on the tooth. And these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be made of strong metal so that they do not bend when pulling, and they should have teeth to hold the gums.
de la racine des dens	of the roots of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains in place, you must put wet cotton on the area for a day or two.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the area is softened; then put in the tweezers known as "algefri", which make the shoulder look like a sore; and inside they are made like a file, and this is their shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tweezers, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root, and insert the instrument called "althali", that is to say, a spatula, of which this is the shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	It should be strong and wide so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out through this, that is good; if not, then use all the instruments, of which the forms come below:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses this instrument which has two branches, of which this is the shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are in the reason of teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large tweezers, of which this is the shape:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this instrument be outside so that it does not break, and know that there are many instruments of teeth; and also other instruments which are not counted; and the wise subtle masters find their own instrument by themselves according to what their works and the disease show them, because there are many diseases in which the ancients did not teach an instrument due to the diversity of others; and if it does not break in the cart or other bones, but protrudes, then he looks for the instruments that he needs, that I have told you about, and helps with gestures, from which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and well-fitting to hold the bone so that it does not slip, but he can hold and remove it; and then restore the site with appropriate medicines, and if there is protuberance in the bone, and it is small, then treat it with this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural structure of the body, and its shape is ugly, especially in virgin women, then you should know if the tooth is new after the tooth, and is not in the right place, and cannot be filed or ground down; then cut it off; and if there is an air bubble with the tooth, then take this instrument of which the form is like a small beak, and let it be made of iron sharpened at the tip:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the gum shrinks a little bit each day because of the hardness of the tooth and so that you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that one can file it, then file it with an ivory file like this is the shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and is also like the file with which we make needles; and file the tooth a little bit each day lightly, so that it does not move until it fits; then smooth it at the end with any rasp, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, then file the sharpness so that it is even and does not cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth is loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the front teeth protrude, either from biting or falling, and the patient cannot press on what he eats without defecating, and you have treated them with constricting medicines to no avail; then they must be restrained with a gold wire, for silver wire turns green and rots, but gold never moves; and the wire should be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the amount of space between the teeth. And if you see the teeth tilting, take the wire and wrap it double between the two healthy teeth, then put the shoulder between the teeth, if there is one or more, until you come to bleeding at the healthy tooth on the other side; then begin covering again until you reach the part where you started, and strain your hand gently and bleedingly, so that it does not move. And your aim should be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then grasp the teeth with tweezers, and bring them together, and fit them between the healthy teeth, and place it so that it does not cut the tongue; then leave it thus tightly as long as it can stay, and if it comes loose, or the threads break, then hold it with another thread; let it remain and serve in this way for its entire life, and this is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of the two healthy teeth, and the two diseased ones, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when a tooth falls out, it is replaced in its place, little by little, as we have said; and no one who is not wise and careful should attempt this, and sometimes the shape of a tooth from a cow's bone is made, and placed in the place where there is a defect, and bound as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover the line on the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Sometimes this ligament which comes under the tongue, is present from birth; or by accident of a wound; and the treatment is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and places his head in yours, and holds his tongue; then grasp the nervous ligament with forceps, as far as the tongue is separated from its bed, and if there is hardening or a lump, and this is due to a wound, then cut it with scissors and grasp the ligament with forceps; and be careful that the cut is not too deep, so as not to reach the artery which is underneath; and when you have done, raise the area with rosewater and garlic, or cold water, then place under the tongue a tent of linen; and apply a cautery to the patient every night, so that the sutures do not stick together.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if blood oozes out, then apply powdered vitriol over the area; and if the wound bleeds, then cauterize it with a slow-burning cautery, which is good for this purpose; then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it is dark colored or black and hard, and the patient does not feel any pain, then do not touch it, as it is a ulcer; and if it is inclined towards gangrene, and there is moisture, cut it from the side with a sharp spatula, and loosen it from both sides; and if bleeding occurs due to your action, apply crushed vitriol until it stops, then return to your treatment, pulling out all the way, then apply a mixture of garlic and vinegar, and clean the wound further until it heals. Then apply a poultice of garlic and vinegar to the affected area, and clean the wound further until it is completely healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	of abscesses in the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes there are growths in the throat called 'godath', and they are properly called 'almonds'; when you treat them, as we have said in the section on their nature, if they are not healed, then take care: if they are hard abscesses of small size and light color, do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, so that there is no blood flow; but let it be until it is ripe, and then you will burst it, or it will burst by itself; and if it is of a white color, soft, and the root is thin, have an instrument to cut, but first examine whether the abscess is calm and peaceful.Et s’il est dur et il rompt par soi, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout; et si li sangs vaint par la fente, si met sor l’enduit qui se fait sor les apostemes dures.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then have the patient sit facing the sun, with his head in your shadow, and open his mouth wide, and let the servant hold his jaw between their hands, and press his tongue down to the bottom of the instrument, from which the shape is taken; it should be made of thin silver or brass like a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	As you press the tongue with this instrument, you will see the abscess; then take a pair of forceps and insert it into the tonsil, pulling it out as far as possible. Remove any threads from the wound with the forceps, then cover the wound with the cautery instrument again, which has a pointed shape, resembling a needle; the instrument should be curved on one side and straight on the other, and very sharp, made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument available, you can use tweezers, which have a similar shape:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And it is pointed on one side and blunt on the other; and when you have lanced one of the glands, lance the other according to the same method, and after the incision gargle the patient with warm water, and water and garlic, and if there is a discharge of blood, gargle the patient with water or cooked pomegranate peels, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then cure it until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses besides the two glands form in the throat, so lance them thus as the two glands were lanced.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside her throat, namely a small one; and it had closed up her entire throat so that the woman could not breathe through the passageway which was blocked, and she could not eat or drink, and would have died if it had continued for another day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high that it had pushed out two little bumps through the nostril holes.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I quickly then, stuck in one fingernail, then drew it out and took a large piece of bowels; then I did the same on the other nostril hole and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; after that, I stuck the nail into the abscess, and scooped out a portion, and only a little blood came out; thus was the passageway of the throat cleared for the woman, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I continued to cut this abscess for a long time; and the abscess grew again, filling up the space that I had emptied, so that it became very big; therefore, I lanced it and cauterized it inside her throat; thus it remained without growing; and I left these parts, and she was in God's hands after me.
de l’uve	of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the eye descends to the lid, and it is swollen and it is long, it is called 'perpendicular'; and if it is fat and round beneath, it is called an 'eye'.
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it has been treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the abscess is quieted, and it is subtle, then you should cover it; and if it is round and gathered and not long, and it is blood-red or flesh-colored or black, then you should avoid cutting into it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it according to the way that I have said, of its whiteness and length, you should cause the patient to sit facing the sun, and press his tongue against the instrument which we have mentioned earlier; then insert the needle into the eye, and draw it out underneath, and cover it at the place of the II instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the II almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you must not cover anything beyond the natural limit; for if you cover more, it weighs down the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said about the incision of the two testes, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient fears covering, you should use an anaesthetic for the pain of cauterisation.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The method of the cautery is for acute disease.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient should put his head into your healthy hand, and then press his tongue against the instrument we have described in the chapter on cautery, and breathe in sharp breaths, so that it is not too slow or too fast; and use the implement of which this is the shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	and has a handle at the top where one puts the medication, like the handle of a spoon, and places the instrument with all the medication on it over the eye; and the patient should lie on his side, so that the saliva and mucus flow from his mouth due to the medication inside, so that it does not descend into the throat and choke him; then hold your hand over the medication and press it onto the eye for the duration of half an hour, until you see it become numb and the bites of the medication calm down. And if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into the eye all the way to the cotton, so that the cotton adheres to the eye; and do this often until the cautery is complete, then let it dry and fall off after four or five days. And if you need to re-administer the cautery of the medication, then do so, and after the cautery, wash around the eye with cold water, and treat it with gargles until it heals.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is safer than incision or cautery; if it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take calamine and hyssop and marjoram and rue and chamomile and avens and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in one pot, and add garlic, and let it boil. And the pot should be well glazed with strong clay, and in the pot there should be one instrument shaped according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be made of silver or brass, and one of the ends put into the mouth of the patient so that the vapour rises to the eye through the canal until the eye is numbed; afterwards, repeat often until the eye dries, and take care not to do this at the beginning of the formation of a hot abscess, for various things can happen; and also not to do this beyond the decline of a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put an egg-shell inside the end so that the patient's mouth is not too hot; for the egg-shell will not let the vapour harm the mouth, and it is a beneficial treatment together with salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times a fish bone or spine, or some object, becomes stuck in the throat; so you must pull out what you can see and press the tongue against the sun with all the instrument, so that you can move the object; and what does not appear to you and is lodged in the throat, you should make the patient vomit as long as the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps the object will come out through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a dry piece of bread; and attach a thread to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the spot, it will stick, and then you can pull it out; and if it does not come out through what we have said, take an instrument of lead according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument be bent at the end so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the end lifted up high; and beware of touching the epiglottis, so that it does not choke him, nor push the bone inside; and move as long as the patient swallows the instrument, so that he can move the object; then he swallows it down, or pulls it out with the instrument equally, until it is out.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the blood of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Sometimes the treatment is with blood-letting, as I have said in the division, through the cure of medicines; and when that does not help, then look into the throat of the patient facing the sun, then press his tongue with the instrument I have described to you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see blood, draw it out with a small hook, or with fine tweezers that are suitable for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that does not work, take a chisel-like cane and put it into the throat of the patient, then put the end of the cane in hot iron, and do this often.Et se le malaide est en la gueule, si traie la sansue a leu; et s’il ne peut avoir l’estrument, si prend une caine et met dedens I fer chaut, puis le boute en la gueule, et fai ce sovent a leu.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient has fever all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	then take full water in a glass, open the mouth, and spray it in without swallowing, and move it with his hand often; and as soon as he feels the water, he will spit it out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not spit as we have said, then smoke the patient with assafetida, using the instrument that I described for smoking out the throat; do this many times, because it will spit out without bleeding.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the way to smoke it is to put burning charcoal in a pot, and cover it with a perforated lid, and insert the instrument through the hole; then spray in the smoke, and the patient puts his throat into his mouth, and closes his mouth so that none of the smoke escapes, but goes to the blood; and now the blood will come out, and if it does not, then repeat the smoking many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, eat salty and sour things, and do not drink water; and then it will be necessary for him to spit it out through this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the instrument used to treat hemorrhoids resembles, when it can be seen, bent tongs designed to enter the throat; it also resembles a doctor's beak and has the roughness of a file so that it cannot let go of what it grasps. And here is its form:
li chapistres des apostemes	for abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	There are many kinds of abscesses, according to what memory brings hereafter from one and another in this book, and they differ in penetration and size; and there are two ways in which they occur, one being in their appearance themselves, and the other in what they contain.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is because of the places where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses in the head are different from those in the fundament, and the abscesses in fleshy places are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own treatment.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And in some abscesses one must not pierce as long as the bowels are healthy according to their completion; and there are some that one must pierce when they have become crusted, and yet they do not die according to their completion, like abscesses that are near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	Because when abscesses come from these joints, and are left until they become purulent around the edges, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which causes contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Or the abscess is by the principal member, and if you delay perforation until it is mature, it will harm the principal member; or it is by the fundament, then one should pierce it in such a way that it may be cured without digestion being completed, except for that which is by the fundament, which should not be allowed to ripen inside but should be elongated and cured, and a fistula will come from it, and it will not heal in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you must know the time of the piercing of the abscess which is dead according to its maturity, and that is when the pain is appeased, and the departing of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and the softening and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and you must make the piercing at the most dependent part of the abscess, and where it appears soft; and the piercing should be made deep in the body, and if the abscesses are on the hands or feet, or in joints, and on nerves, and arteries, and in all places alike where there is no fold.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those who bend, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to let the perforation be until it is confirmed in completed digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before that, the body is drawn out, and it is full of much filth, and perhaps hardens the lips and the depths within him.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if to any abscess that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And one must treat small abscesses with small holes, and large abscesses with large holes, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses that one should cut out the core, and cover it; when it has become as soft as rags, and is deadened, one must do as one does with blisters: and there are some that split into three angles, and some that one covers just like a fir tree, and others that have one round incision, and other incisions and similar coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who have no head, as with a superficial abscess, you must pierce it plainly; and when the abscess is large, and it has drawn a great bowstring, and you pierce it, do not draw out the entire bowstring in that hour, but draw out a part of it; then stop the abscess until the next day, then draw out something again from the other side; do this many times, little by little, until the bowstring is fully released; likewise if the patient is of weak constitution, or a woman carrying a child, or a small child, or an old decrepit man.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the pus may spurt out with the release of the bowstring, and the patient may die without your realizing it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, approach this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced the abscess, wash the wound, and examine if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a plain cut, apply bandages of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess with many openings, you should tie a tent in each opening so that they come together; and if you have cut into the abscess and exposed part of the skin, and cleaned it around, you should fill it with old cotton or linseed without moisture, and bandage it for three days; then remove the bandage and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs in your work, bring cold water and ease it, and moisten the cloth, and place it over the bleeding area many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding persists, apply treatment and care, and the powders that I mentioned with my own hands in this book; and if it is during the winter, and the area is very nervous, then you should place wet tents and cloths soaked in warm wine and oil over it; and if it is in the summer, and the area is fleshy, then you should place wet cloths soaked in water and oil, or in cool wine and oil, for a third of a day, as we have said; then loosen the abscess, wash and treat it, as it should be, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	Now you should understand, in general, the treatment of abscesses. I have told you how to proceed before treating abscesses, and you can find this chapter now.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	From the skin of the head come small abscesses, and they are caused by lice, just like the nits on a goose, and there are many variations of them.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fatty and smooth where there is moisture just as with pulses; and there are some that are hard and stony in texture, and there is no doubt if the artery does not cause contrary effects.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the throat is that you should try with every instrument called "forceps", from which the form comes afterwards, whatever it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, they force it out from above.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is expelled, they scorch without leaving anything of the skin that contains the moisture, for it will return again if something is left behind; then plunge cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound and let it be until the next day, and those who remain during the night will recover.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then resume the cotton, as before, on the second day and the third, until you know that it will not remain overnight; then heal the wound with ointment that is appropriate, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess contains pus and fat, then open it according to this form, from the top; and cut your fingernails, and scrape off all the scabs, and apply all your treatment to drawing out the pus under the skin; and if the artery pulsates in a contrary fashion, then do what I have told you after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do this for an abscess that is full of pus, cutting and treating it as I have said.Et se li apostemes ne veut pas faire evacuation de l’escorche, si li cope selonc ceste forme; et si li sainz vout a la mort, si le cop en la forme que je t’ai dit avant.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the incision on the abscess of stone and moisture, it is lighter, because they are of little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if any of these abscesses there is no moisture, and some were the abscesses that I copied from the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and could not be broken; and if anyone had burst them, they would have made a wound just like a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming to the head, other than those that come to the heads of children and the roots of the ears, the opening should be at the most dependent location, so that the bowels can exit; and treat them as appropriate.
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times abscesses come to the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come elsewhere in the body, and they are large, and some are intertwined with each other.Et li clous des enfans, si com il convient, il fuet boine chose que les cure, et que les fiet boines curaties; car s’il adonques l’enfaunt ne morist pas de la maladye qui le veniet, si morist par la malcuratie; car il est grant danger as enfans qui sont en ceste maladye.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly within its coat, as the nodule and abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many similar scrofulas.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and others that are malignant and will not respond to treatment.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	For those that you see are of good disposition for cauterization, and resemble the color of the body, and are flat on each side and not raised on the nerves or artery or duct, and is not deep; you should cut it from above, and scrape off each part, and be careful that you do not cut the nerve or vein, and do not use too much force, or else the hand will shake, and do not go too far, so that you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it will not let you work, then put crushed vitriol or some powder that stops bleeding into the wound, and compress the wound; and leave it until the abscess is subdued, and the wound softened, and begins to suppurate.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the bleeding is stopped, return to your work, completing it; then examine with your finger if any small scrofula remains, cut and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, you should not cut that scrofula in its root but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it drop without harm; then treat the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then heal it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut the whole scrofula, you should bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now so that no surplus remains due to the size of the scrofula.Et si li sans ne voulent point estainchir, si met en la voinne vitriole broiet, ou autre poudres qui contengent sang, et li estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et li membres amolisiz, et comence a porrir.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	then you must understand to cover the root of it, and draw it out, and cut it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrophules that hold superfluity, pierce where it appears dead; and pierce it thus as the one before was said, depending on it, then treat it with tenting along with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts that which is remained of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, then cure it with ointment encrusting flesh, until it is healed.
de squinance	of scrofula
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients wrote and spoke of throat surgery; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the script of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those with scrofula, it is necessary to open the flap of the throat, called the 'epiglottis'; and this should be done gently, for all the veins and the lymph node are affected by the disease, whether the abscess is hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both armpits.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the lymph node channel, one must cover the epiglottis to avoid the danger that comes from strangulation.Il conviant aussi que li medecins sache le goute et le sentour de la maladie; car onque il n’i a pas bon sanz sa science.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we want to split the epiglottis, we must split it below the three circles or four, a little split across, between the two circles, or by the amount of the split from the soft palate; and those parts that are suitable for the splitting of the epiglottis so that there is no flesh in it, and the vessels are long within.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the masters are fearful, they should stretch the skin of the throat to the Adam's apple, then split the windpipe until it reaches the larynx; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see anything, and then close the wound, as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the windpipe at the larynx, which jumps out through the place that is broken, and by the defect in the voice; and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed of which one doubts strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound from the heart, and sew it up entirely without the cartilage; then administer remedies that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim says one should not do this until the throat is completely choked, and the patient judged to be dead, and the failure of the windpipe.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And then close the epiglottis so that the patient cannot choke, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death; and because of this the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the maliciousness of the disease had passed, and it passes in three or four days. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and treat it, until it was healed; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw a maiden take a knife and stab herself in the throat, slicing open part of her windpipe; I was called to heal her, and found her as good as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound and found that blood had issued from it; I saw that it had not bled copiously or been directed outward other than through the throat, and the blood had escaped through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried and sewed up the wound, healing her until she recovered; the maiden was left hoarse, but returned to her usual state; thus I say that one should not fear cutting the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called a "gorge hernia", and it is a large abscess the color of yolk, often found in women; there are two types: natural and accidental; a natural hernia has no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental hernia has two forms; one resembles a cyst, and the other is like an abscess coming from an artery; there is danger in it, and one should not attempt to force anything unless it is small, and one should probe and examine throughout the entrance: if you find it just like a cyst, and it cannot be pushed in at all, then cut into it as one cuts a cyst, and treat it as it should be treated, until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	of nuts
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways to treat dislocations, and I will describe all of their appearances; now I must explain the distinction between a displacement and an issue.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that an issue is a fever and heat which persists until the effusion has passed and the swelling is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With a displacement there is no heat, fever, or pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body; it begins like a boil and becomes swollen; and they are according to two appearances, either dry or moist, and in terms of color they are as I have described in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to the treatment of the nose, you should first examine and test it with all the instruments called "introductors," according to what its shape will allow in the following chapters.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the method of inquiring into abscesses is that you press on the moistest place that you find in the abscess, and repeatedly twist your fingers, until you feel that the pus has broken through the skin; then extract the pus, and be careful not to push any further.Et li maniere de la saignie est que tu prindras le sang ou la veine qui est plus proche de la piere et qui en va al corps, et li trunchons a la main et le piez; si fers le même por le bras et le col; et li trunchons soit selonc ses nombres.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If moisture runs out quickly, whatever color it is, treat it as I have said for other abscesses. And if after the incision no moisture comes out, know that it is fatty; therefore, cut it in a cross pattern and take it with tweezers, and lightly scrape each part and guard the wound where it lies so that you draw it clean with the needle. And if you cannot draw it clean, then draw it in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if it remains, the nose will return many times; and if a little remains, and the pain troubles you, then apply some corrosive powders to the wound, and bind it up with a hot abscess poultice, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed. And if the nostril is large, cut the two lips of the wound, and treat it with what heals ulcers.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the bleeding vein is contrary or elsewhere, then hurry and apply ground vitriol, and leave it for two or three days until the wound scabs over, and rest from the bleeding; then return to applying what was left off earlier.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of the trocar, which come in three types: large, medium, and small. There are also three types of needle used for incising abscesses: one called an "albaret", another called a "breb", and there are also three types of these: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the opening of the fistula. They are similar to the needles used for sewing sorcerers' wounds, made of brass, iron, or silver. The yellow ones are more effective, and those made of black lead are best for treating fistulous sores. They come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the opening of the fistula.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of the knives are very similar, as you can see: large, medium, and small. There are also knives with two curves in three types; and knives with three curves, which come in three types as well; and knives with one curve only, which come in three types; and all of these are necessary for their respective purposes.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The heads of these instruments are sharp, and some cut only on one side, which is used to scorch the nose without cutting the vein or nerve; and with such instruments, bloodstains appear in many places so that the patient does not perceive when opening an abscess. There are three types: large, small, and medium, as you can see; and they are only used on fleshy parts like legs, arms, breasts, and similar areas; and sometimes a smaller instrument is made, resembling scorched fists, according to this form, with which blood is stanched.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and sometimes they put it into the place that heals by the opening of veins and arteries, and sometimes according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes men's breasts swell when they become corrupted, so that they look like women's breasts; and they remain ugly and swollen, and if one wants to cure them, one should bleed according to this form from the line .b. up to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	then scorch the fat, and fill the wound with medicine encasing charcoal, then bring together the two lips of the wound with sutures, and treat it until it is healed; and if the mammary gland sags down, and becomes soft due to its size as happens to women, then make two slits above it, in the shape of similar slits; one holding onto the other at the end of both, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.; then scorch the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and administer what we have said about sutures and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to bleeding, then you should fill the wound with moist cotton saturated with a corrosive ointment; and leave it until it dissolves the remaining skin and fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses on the scalp
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come under the scalp are types of hard scrofula, and there are some that contain pus.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess has been expelled, fill it with old cotton, and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton, and treat with a suitable ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scrofula, they should be treated as we have described for fissures of scrofula; and if a wound opens in the abscess, they should administer cautery as we have described above.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is large and the skin above is attached, this often results in abscesses, and similarly with a swollen vein and abscess; and one can identify it as due to the artery when the abscess is long and deep; and when you press it with your fingers, you feel tension; and when it is due to the vein, there are pus-filled bumps visible on the surface; and it is folly to cover this type of abscess, especially when located under the nails, on the fingers and toes, on the neck, or in other places, as it can be very dangerous.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, one must avoid cauterizing with iron and also avoid cautery on the head when it is due to an abscess on the artery; similarly, for an abscess caused by a swollen vein, one should make an incision along the vein from above the skin down to the artery, then pierce the artery with a needle at two places, and tie it off with a double thread at each place, as I instructed you in the extraction of the temporal arteries; then pierce between the two ties with an instrument, so that the blood flows out, and release the abscess; next, apply a poultice of warm wine and oil, followed by tenting and ointments until it heals; if the abscess is due to a swollen vein, one should take some pus from the abscess onto their hand, then pierce the vein with a needle at the place held in the hand, and pass a double thread through it, tying it off at both ends; then, if there is any doubt that the thread will slip out, insert another needle through the thread at various places along the abscess, and tie off the thread in three or four places; then lance the abscess to release the pus, scrape away the superficial pus from the skin, and leave the thread tied; finally, apply a moistened cloth, followed by poultices and ointments until it heals.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, as an abscess comes in the artery and vein, there are abscesses of the nerves when they are hurt, or from too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens most often in the shoulders and the elbows and in all joints where there are connections, and it is a painful abscess, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in various states without pain; and when one presses on it firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not deep within the body but beneath the skin; and it becomes mute from all sides, and does not go forward or backward, or downward or upward, and that which is in joints should not be covered by iron: otherwise there might be contraction; and for that which is on the head or on the forehead, make a poultice with spatanil.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and cut off its root; and if it is large, pierce it with an awl, and scrape it out, then cut out the bone and stitch up the wound to heal it.
des grosses boces pendans	large boils hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	At times it occurs in the belly and nowhere else; it is a disease called "fungus" because of its resemblance to ears, with fine roots and large leaves. There are small ones and very large ones; I saw a man who had two on his belly that looked more like fungi than anything else, without any difference, and they were white, with thin roots, and split open, and moisture ran out of them.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I cut them open and found one weighing 18 ounces and the other 6 ounces; the treatment for this is to make an incision if the disease is moist, and the color of the joint is white and moist with thin roots; then cut it with a spatulum widely, and have the fire cautery ready.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For often there is excessive bleeding when cutting into a vein, and if the blood flows, then hasten to cauterize it; and if you see that the disease fears and is frightened of the iron incision, take a well-prepared thread of flax, and tie the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days; then bind it tightly, and do not stop compressing the flaxen thread until he cuts out the joint, and through it without effort; and if the roots are large, then fear the incision because of the belly, but you can certainly cut in half, then cauterize so that it does not return; then cure the wound, and be careful not to cut into the skin which is of a foul color and poor sensation and milk-like appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess with an ulcer, and I will come to the treatment of ulcers later.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil has burst
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the boil comes from cauterization of a wound or from a fissure in the syphilis, and it is on the abdomen and some of the bowels, as it happens in other routs, or from blood flowing from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from flatulence; and if it is from the rout of syphilis and from the outlet of the bowel, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and it opens from diverse outlets.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the exit of the intestine, then it is more varied; when pressed with the hands, it springs back, and then returns, and sometimes it is constricted, and enlarges greatly at the entrance of the bath and from great effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	If it is due to moisture, it is a minor issue and opens easily when you press it with your hand without any restriction; and if it is due to blood, the abscesses are large and hard, and they are fixed according to a certain quantity; and if it is due to flatulence, it is soft to the touch, and the procedure involves checking whether the appearance is due to blood from an artery or vein, or flatulence.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you need to let the wound heal.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is in the intestine or bowels, then you must command the patient to tighten his stomach and be stretched out straight, then sign all around the belly; then command him to lie still between your hands, then go around the area that you have marked all around the spasm, then press down on half of the abscess above the great toenail; then tie it tightly all around with a strong thread or strong silk rope, and let the nail be cut off from the toe; then open up half of the abscess stretched over the string, and probe the intestine; if you find it caught in the string, cut it free from the stomach; and if you find the bowel, grab it at the toenail and cut away the excess; and if the artery or vein is causing problems, go around it gently and then return to your work and take two needles, put two strong threads through them, and pierce what you have made into a cross; then pull out the abscess in four places with the needles, and if you see anything, remove the needles and leave the wound open until it drains, and cut away the dead flesh by itself; once it becomes thin and drains, clean the wound as needed and close it up.
dou chancre	of cancer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have discussed the appearance of cancer, and how to treat it with medicine, and how to avoid using iron in its treatment; and we speak of cancers that develop in ulcers, and great care must be taken in their treatment. The ancients say that when a cancer is in a place where it can be easily reached, like those on the breast, or thigh, or similar places, then one must remove it entirely as soon as possible. But for large and old cancers, one should not attempt to treat them, because I have never known anyone to be cured of such; nor has anyone ever been cured before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatment for cancers that can be reached, as we have said, is to first purge the patient with black colewort, then let him bleed if he has a manifest repletion, and then treat the cancer itself. Then cut away all the hair around it, and remove the bone underneath without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow out freely, and squeeze the area with your hand or something else to ensure that all the blood is gone. If bleeding from an artery or vein makes the incision difficult, cauterize it until the blood vessels are sealed off. Then treat the wound further until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsyThe following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already described in the division the appearances of dropsy, and how the accumulation of fluid is caused, and the signs of each appearance, and the treatment by medicine, and that which is cured by iron; only this is to be noted: one must not use iron for these two appearances: namely, tympany and hydrops, for they are deadly; therefore when you treat this appearance of dropsy, called "tympany", with medicine, and the cure does not help, then consider if the patient is feeble, or has another illness besides dropsy, such as a fever and similar things; in that case one must not use iron, for there is danger. But if you see the patient is of strong constitution, and has no other illness but dropsy alone, and is not too young nor too old, then one should proceed thus: lift the patient upright on your hands, and the minister presses the abdomen by pushing the fluid to the lowest part of the feet, then take the spathumile spine according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And cut into two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And cut into two parts, but do not make it too pointed so that it can enter the intestines when inserted, nor should it bleed; then examine if the hydropsy is pressing against the intestines: if it is due to a disease of the liver, then your incision should be on the left side of the groin three fingers wide; and if it is due to the spleen, then make the incision on the right side; and you must not allow the patient to lie on the incision so that the excess fluids do not flow towards the weak area; then pierce the skin with your instrument, and insert it, and leave your hand on the spathomile between the skin and the syphax as much as a fingernail or an inch in width; then pierce the syphax until the spathomile reaches the desired location, and this is where the water is located, then pull it out, and insert your instrument to drain the fluid:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a silver cane, and is made of bronze or light archute, and has in the lower part a small hole; and on one side are three holes, two on another side, and one on another; and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that the scribes make the pen.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	at the top of this is the funnel, so that when the instrument comes to a boil, it descends immediately onto the instrument; then empty half or a third of it, for if you empty more than is needed in that hour, by chance the patient may die from the disruption of his spirit due to the weapon, or he may fall into a faint, or he may approach death; but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the sick man signify, and his pulses; then withdraw the instrument and retain the water, which is now retained by the membrane that blocks the hole above the throat, about which I have spoken, that you pierce in this way; then reintroduce the instrument the next day if you see the patient can bear it, and withdraw a little water; do this every day, and beware of overdoing it until only a little water remains.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	If you doubt the illness, let him drink a lot of water, and use the bath or hot sand, and through much sweating, and in the sun; and if he turns yellow from drinking, then treat with drugs that dry up, until he is cured; and cauterize over the stomach and liver and spleen after extracting the water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	the swelling of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born without a foreskin, or with a small foreskin, or it is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If this is the case, then you must immediately pierce the foreskin with a very fine needle according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then put a slender piece of lead into the foreskin and tie it and leave it there for 3 or 4 days, and when he wants to urinate, remove the plug and let him urinate, then replace the plug; and sometimes none is needed, because the urine that comes out will not allow the foreskin to close.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those whose opening is small, if treated with the cautery of lead, as we have said, will expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have an opening in their place are constipated, for some are born with the opening at the head of the penis, which prevents them from urinating until they lift their penis upwards; and they cannot ejaculate because the material cannot reach the outside, and this is a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, then the head of the penis and the glans are pulled out to the size of a feather, so that the foreskin tears in the middle, as it should be; and you must guard against bleeding which often occurs, and if it does, stop the blood with something that stops blood, and cure the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these blisters come on the penis, and it is an ugly-looking wart; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so you must grasp them with a pair of fine tweezers, and pull off both the head and root completely, then moisten cotton with Egyptian ointment and apply it; then cure it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the discharge is malignant, discolored and foul-smelling, then you should apply a cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cut it, and if the discharge is inside the penis, with part of it inside the foreskin and part outside, then you should first remove the discharge that is inside; and when it has healed, treat the external portion.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because when you heal it together, if the glans of the penis is not secured so that it is not pierced, then darkness and corruption comes in his penis and in the scrotum; so everything that is black and corrupted must be cut away, then apply the ointment of honey and flour made from pomegranate rind and fennel, then heal it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if there is bleeding, bring the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauteries have two uses together: that is, for bleeding and for corruption; and if the glans of the penis is swollen and drawn in, then you must put a tube through the penis and let the patient urinate through it; and when the skin is raw at the tip of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or because of a wound or an abscess, then you must certainly scrape off the skin with an instrument, as far as the glans, and loosen and free the glans of the penis entirely; and if it is a serious thing to discuss this, then you should scrape it with a spatulum made from a little at the tip of the penis and through the foreskin; then draw it gently between two, and put a thin damp linen cloth in cold water over it so that it does not become raw again.
de la circoncision	on circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a natural process like other wounds; nevertheless, when we perform this act intentionally, especially on children, it is necessary to do it properly and gently for their safety.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have nothing on this subject except what we have acquired through experimentation.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the greatest part of masters and surgeons who made circumcision all around the foreskin, and in many places, and on every new-born; then the hyleus would coagulate because there are two membranes, and sometimes one above would coagulate and the other below would remain.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Now they cover it again and the pain is doubled; and in the cleaning of the foreskin, which is not completely healed at the tip of the member; and in the cleaning of the fingernail, sometimes the nail escapes the fire, and the wound runs, and many times they are born with no need for cleaning, and I have seen this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the cleaning made on the foreskin there is always the danger of cutting too much from above and below. I have found through experience that this is the case with all cuts.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because when you press your hand, you cut evenly in I all forces; but the thread should be well wrapped around the skin; and the way of the first work is that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only tying the thread around the pole, and then let him pull it in all the ways he can; then let him stand between your hands straight, and support the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, or any of the instruments; then put your hand to the pole and breathe on the heart, and draw it up so that the head of the pole is in; then purify it well from the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the place marked with a double thread, then tie it under I to the other line; and hold it by the second tie with the index finger and thumb, and pinch between the two lines, then lift the heart quickly and draw the head of the pole; then let the blood run little by little, for that is the wound; and put powder on top of the powder, the drape glued with a cooked egg tempered with rose water, confit with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it until the next day, and cure it with another cure until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces for cleansing is as follows: the two heads should be tense and pointed, and the heads should be as large as the palm equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	the error of purification occurs when the pus inside is exposed to the incision; therefore, you must stretch it with your fingernail, so that the skin forms an abscess; and then cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, hold it with tweezers, and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it persists for 3 days, and what is under the foreskin is swollen, let it be until the abscesses are reduced and the skin is lightly scraped; then cut as you can, taking care not to harm the foreskin in any way.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, treat the site of the wound with a powder, as we have described in the treatise on powders, and if it cuts too deeply into the skin, and it bleeds, it will not hurt; therefore, treat it as we have said until it is healed.Et s’il advenist que li leus se deschause et ne puet apaiser, si doit on la couper legierement, si com il est dit au traitier de l’escorche, et si le leu est sanez, si ne nuira point; car il advenit maintes fois que li leus se deschaussent, et se l’on ne le cope, il advenist que la verge se chaude et se fende, et il advenist que li leus se dessuche de la verge.
dou retenement de l’urine	holding back urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to a stone, or frozen blood, or a tumor, or similar conditions that we have discussed in the previous section. If the urine is not released and you see the obstruction caused by the stone located at the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent forward at the waist, with his feet placed on his back, his stomach pressed down from above the waist, and the patient straining as hard as he can. This will force the neck of the bladder upward, causing the stone to be expelled, and the urine to flow; if this does not happen as described, and the patient experiences great pain, then you should use a device called a "syringe", made as follows: it should have a thin, flexible silver shaft, like the feather of a bird; the tube should be about a palm and a half in length, with a thin tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the way to remove the urinary obstruction is to take a double thread and tie at the end a piece of wool or cotton, and insert the end of the thread into the syringe; and squeeze out the excess wool and insert it into the syringe up to the tip, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk; then have the patient sit on a seat, and apply the oil moistened with olive oil and warm water to the bladder and penis; then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the abdomen; then fill the syringe all the way up to the bladder, and feel the patient's bladder being emptied into the syringe; if this is not done in this order, the person guiding where the syringe goes is doing it wrong; then tie off the thread at the wool, and the urine will follow the wool; then remove the syringe, and let the urine flow out; and reinsert the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When there are cuts or bleeding in the bladder, or when pus is accumulated, and you see the fluids and medications dripping, then do all the instruments that are called "clepsydra", and this is how it is formed:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed and has three openings: two on one side and one on the other, as you can see. The location where the medicine enters should be such that it blocks the penis well without addition, so that moisture can be extracted and re-inserted when needed; and when you see your medicines flowing into the bladder, put the tip of the syringe into the moisture, and draw it out while pushing it in; thus, you will extract the moisture with the syringe and then push it strongly back in. The moisture will now enter and come to the bladder, so that the patient can feel it. This is the form of the subtle enema by which one enemas the bladder. Thus:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is made of silver or brass, and its head is higher; below, there is one testicle or two; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture in it that you want to use to enema the bladder, then tie it between the two testicles with a thin double string, and heat this moisture over the fire; then insert the tip of the enema into the penis, and squeeze your hand on the bladder gently, so that all the moisture comes in until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder. If you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make it into a circle, and pierce it all around; then insert the string tightly through these openings, then assemble the circle as one assembles a wheel, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument. Do as you did with the bladder, squeezing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already discussed in the division of stones, and their extraction together with medicines; and I have described the difference between a stone lodged in the ureter, and all the signs, and in which kind of stone one should operate with cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will now tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder occurs more often in children, and it is a sign that the urine flows from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and it causes pain in the penis, and the patient may urinate many times, and then the flow stops; and many of these have the hernia; and the cure is much easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to draw out all the feces that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it sometimes blocks the search for stones.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet and lift him up and move him around so that the stone descends into the bladder, and sometimes it comes out from above; then let him sit between your hands which are prepared, and his hands should be under his thighs, so that the bladder is completely tilted downward; then probe and touch inside; if you feel the stone in the space, then hurry now to cut upon the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not come out with the touch, then wet your index finger of the left hand with oil, if the patient is fat, or your middle finger, if the patient is thin and fully grown; then insert it into their anus, and probe for the stone, and when you feel it at your finger, push it up to the neck of the bladder; then press against your finger, and move it out where you intend to cut.Et li doins de la main drete soit sus le col de la vessie por l’esguarder que la piere ne descende en la vessie.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and command the patient to extend his testicles upward with his right hand, and with his left hand pull back the skin beneath the testicles in the area where the incision is made; then insert the spatulum, of which this is the shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And they make an incision between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the scrotum; and let it be straight on the stone, and both testicles should be pressed against the anus, and let the incision be diagonal so that it is wide at the top and narrow at the bottom, according to the size of the stone, not too large; by chance the pressure on the testicle which is against the anus may cause it to burst without any effort; and know that there is a kind of stone which has angles and edges: it is difficult to remove. And there is another kind which is round like a pebble, and its extraction is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	Therefore, when you have one with angles and edges, make the incision larger; and if it does not burst, then you must grip it with tongs which are like a file at the tip, to extract the stone so that it does not escape; or you insert under the instrument a thin, curved hook; and if you cannot grasp it in this way, then enlarge the opening of the urethra, and if the blood comes out, stop it with vitriole; and if there is more than one stone, then insert first the largest into the neck of the bladder, then push the rest upward, and then draw them out.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then it must be sewn, and a larger wound made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	Because there are two things that can happen to the patient: they may die, or their urine may flow out from where the skin cannot heal; but nevertheless, try to pull it, or scrape it away with tweezers, as much as you can; and when you have finished your work, apply incense, aloe, and dragon's blood to the wound, and constrict it, and place a moistened cloth in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then resew the wound on their neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove it, wash the area well with oil and water, then treat the wound with ointment of diaphenicon and basilicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if hot abscesses and corrosions of blood come to the wound and congealing of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by this means in such a way that urine passes with the urine: then push your finger into the wound and draw out that blood, for if it remains there, the bladder will be corroded and burst; then wash the wound with water and vinegar, and aid the patient in every way you know how until he is healed; and it is fitting that every hour that you treat him, you tie his two thighs together and assemble remedies over the wound.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small and it is in the urethra, stuck in place, and the urine cannot pass through; then the treatment of what I am saying is that you cut it many times with a knife, and this cutting by this treatment is an excuse for not cutting it.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have experienced this myself.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take a piece of iron according to this form, and let it be pointed at three angles, and fix it into a stick:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and wind it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot return to the bladder; then push the awl into the penis gently, until it reaches the stone; then turn the awl in your hand inside the stone a little at a time, until you can pierce the stone from another side; then the urine will come out soon, then press your hand on what is left of the stone that is still inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is broken at once, and comes out with the urine, then the patient is healed; but if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie a string under the stone and another above it, then stretch the penis over the stone between these two strings, then pull it out, and untie the string, and cleanse the frozen blood that is in the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of women's stones
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	Sometimes stones become stuck in women, and if they do, the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; the second is that one cannot find a skilled woman who can be examined by midwives, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman well skilled in this art of midwifery; and the fourth way is that the woman's stone is more deeply embedded than a man's, so it requires a deeper incision, and great fear is involved. And if necessity arises, one should take a midwife who is well skilled, and with difficulty extract the stone from her, and if you cannot extract it, do not want to use a very fine probe; and present a wise woman knowledgeable about midwifery or a woman skilled in part of the art, and instruct her to do what you direct according to your examination of the stone; and be sure to check whether the woman is a virgin. Then she should press her finger into the vagina and seek out the stone; and if she finds it, she should grip it beneath her finger, and I instruct her to press her left hand firmly over the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she has a hernia, it is necessary to move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder down to the root of the thigh; then press on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the groin, where the muscle is most tender, and feel for the stone in that area; and do not move your finger on top of or below the stone, and let the incision be small at first. Then pour wine into the incision if you feel the stone has been cut so that it can come out, and know that there are many types of stones: some are small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and some have hairs.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	[and] know their appearances in order to identify the type [of stone].
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood does not stop flowing, then put ground vitriol on the wound and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your work until the stone is removed, and have at hand the instruments I have told you about in the extraction of stones from men so that they can assist you in your task. And if the blood does not stop and it is an artery that has been cut, then put the powder on the wound and apply pressure with bandages and tourniquets; do not touch the stone again or try to pull it out, lest the patient die. Then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the wound has healed, return to your work until the stone is expelled.
de hernie carnouse	of fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Aquous pus is nothing else but an accumulation of moisture or white pus, which is located beneath the heart of the testicles and contains the sperm; and it is called "pus", and sometimes it is found within the membrane of the testicle, as if it were another testicle; and what we have said is the skin of the testicle between the white pus. And this does not usually happen.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the cause of this disease is from weakness which comes to the testicles, and that matter is spread about.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: or it is jaundice-colored, or redless, or black, or watery white, and it happens more; and these are the signs of recognizing this assembly, for if it is in the white syphilis that we have said, then the abscesses are reason, a little long as the shape of an egg, and does not appear to the testicles, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the testicle itself, then the abscesses are reason with part of an egg, and because of this one thinks it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white syphilis, then one feels good; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, try all the intrusions, from which the form is as mentioned before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, then, what comes after the foreskin, judge what is inside it.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, the patient should be healed according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then he lies on his back on something slightly raised, and many folds of cloth are placed beneath him; then he sits up on his left side, and he commands the attendant to sit on his right, and stretches out the rod to one of the two ribs near the heart; then take the spatulum, and lift the skin of the breast among them from the long end down to the armpit, and let this incision be straight while cutting the skin of the breast up to the white of the armpit, and tear it gently according to its strength; then pierce the armpit with a large hole, and draw out all the water, and then put in your fingers, and stretch the armpit upward; and do not touch the heart of the breast, but only the armpit; lift up all around it carefully, for if you do not lift it well, the water will return; and if the egg jumped out during your work, then return it to its place when you have finished the work of the armpit; then join the two lips of the breast with a single stitch, then cure it as other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the testicle corrupted by some other disease, then you must tie off the vessels that are suspended, fearing an effusion of blood; then cut the testicle away at its very suspension, and extract it, and dress the wound as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	If the wound is split into two parts, know that these are the branches; then bandage the other part as you did the first, then wash with blood, and put soft wool soaked in rose oil into the wound; and put another piece of soft wool soaked in wine and oil over it, and place the two pieces of cloth on top, and put doubled sheets on top of them, and tie it up around the entire wound according to this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two pieces of cloth, and stuff them with wool according to this pattern and have them sewn together at the crotch of the breeches, and one end placed under the buttock up to the back, and the other end at the groin; and the two other ends over the two angles, and tie the entire bandage around the waist of the breeches; and sometimes medicine this branch with cauterization instead of iron, and take a thin cultellaire cautery, and scorch the skin of the branches, and it will be revealed white like water; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that white part at the joints, and scorch it with this thin hot cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the cup in every way that you can, as long as you stretch everything out; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is safer; and move while guarding against blood flow, and changes in the incision of the wound; and if nothing makes you contrary, or abscesses or blood flow or anything else, then cure what makes you contrary, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this treatment due to its horribleness, then administer the perforation as I told you, and it is when you are well assured by the signs that we have said that the water is gone, then let the patient sit on a high seat; then pierce the abscess in the part below all the spasm large, and place the perforation deep into the body; and make the holes wide so that all the water flows out; then put cotton over the area, and bandage it, and leave it to drain the remaining water, then treat the wound until it heals; and if the white film does not let the water out through the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a feather or the instrument used to treat water in the sick, of which the shape is described earlier; and widen the wound, and know that the water will return, and be gathered after six months or around there, and when it is gathered as before, and thus the patient will pass their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the incision of this branch there is fear in many dispositions, because of which it seems better to leave it; and I will tell you the work and the appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	So I say that many abscesses come from the body, especially in the groins; and this is due to various causes.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is what you need to know: it can be caused by an excessive build-up of bile or phlegm, or by a blow; and the color of the abscess depends on the color of the body; and there is no pain, and it is a serious abscess; and sometimes there are gray, fearful, and pus-filled abscesses, with a flowing color, and at times it comes from a vein, or from inflammation of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is due to a vein, it is recognized by the hot disposition of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and you should not touch it.Quant c’est par enfleure de voine, si est conus quant li voins se rompent et fuient par l’aposteme, et les voins sont vides, et ne peut mie fuyr plus.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Those who are made of swelling of the vein are known by their appearance and touch with both hands, and anyone can well make the incision on this appearance and on other characters; and you should cut the heart of the eggs, then the yolks are on top, and the white part is forced out from under, and the suspension is released from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already cooked with these necessary characters, then you must cut the egg and the heart; and if there is air in the white or in that which is inside the vessels, then you must release all of that membrane and cut it roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the egg's yolk is at the back, you must scoop it all out and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is finished, apply the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapper similar to an onion, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient grieves greatly when he moves; and the cure for this disease is also prepared as fearfully as that one before, and nevertheless we will tell you its operation according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary for you to have the patient sit on a raised seat, then tie the suspensory band of testicles down with your fingers, around all the vessels that are close to the penis, and constrict them tightly; then pierce with a broad, sharp spatula through the vessels, as far as they can be uncovered, and then scrape each side, just as we have said in the extraction of the arteries in the temples; then insert a needle where there is a double thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein appeared, and tie it directly to the other end; then pierce them straight in the middle, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisture; then cure the wound as with the others or with a bowstring, so that no vessel is torn that nourishes one of the testicles; for through this no harm comes, and if veins come from all the vessels, then the testicles should be tied to all the vessels; so that the urethra does not lose its nourishment due to the piercing of the vessels, and dry up and cannot heal.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rutting of the syphilis
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The causes of this hernia are from the rupture that occurs in the diaphragm, or from the extension over the abdomen in the region of the intestines, causing them to descend from this opening to one of the sides; and this opening is in the diaphragm, or from its extension, and these two types of hernias occur from many causes: from a blow, or from jumping, or from coughing, or from lifting a heavy load, and similar activities. The sign that it is from an extension in the diaphragm is that it occurs slowly over a long time, and does not happen suddenly; and the hernia is equal in size up to the depth, because the diaphragm pushes down on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of the section of the sinus that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear diverse below the skin, and this is due to the exit of the intestine and the body from the sinus.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines descend with it, and are retained inside, and cause great suffering to the patient, especially when they are pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cures of iron there is fear, from which one should escape.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the way to treat it is to instruct the patient to pull the intestine back into the wound with his hand if he can; then hold the neck between your hands and lift the buttocks; then the chest will be above, and stretch all the skin of the groin; then insert the fingers of the hand into the opening in the abdomen according to what is needed to open the wound, so that the bowel can come out; then scrape off the hernia that is under the skin of the scrotum, until the white hernia sac is exposed all over; then put your index finger into the one that is next to the testicle, between the white hernia sac which is under the skin of the egg, and between the second hernia sac, and separate what is behind the egg, and between the second hernia sac; then move with your right hand into the groin, and hold the white hernia sac in your left hand, and lift the testicle up to the hernia sac; and tell the assistant to pull the testicle up, and untie what is behind the bandage; and feel with your fingers if there is any intestine wrapped around the hard white hernia sac, and if you find anything, put it back into the abdomen; then take a needle with a thick thread made from ten threads, and insert it into the back part of the hernia sac, which is under the skin of the scrotum; then grasp the heads of the threads, so that there are four threads; then tie them together in a cross pattern, and tie the hernia sac, which we said was under the skin of the scrotum, with two strong ties from two parts; then wrap up the thread around the groin, and tie it tightly in two places, so that none of the vessels that supply blood to it can enter, or an abscess will form there; then put the bandage back on according to the first long band, two fingers from that one; and after those two ties, leave the hernia sac under the skin of the scrotum hanging loose as before; then grasp the part under the skin of the scrotum, so that the blood runs, and the bowel, as we said earlier; then apply soft wool soaked in oil to the wound, and put on the bandage that we mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white ulcer we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens many times, and leaves the lien as long as it weeps through it; and if it is slow to fall off, then make an incision with a hot needle and apply what we have said until it falls out; then cure the wound with another cure until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch of medicine, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients say that it is made like a ram's horn which is joined to the vein, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after the incision above, lightly from below; then cut into it, and cure the abscess with what was said, until the vessels weep; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes there is a rupture in the intestines, as we have said, and the place opens up; but none of the intestines come out, and if any do come out, it is only a little, and they need to be repaired every hour; and even if he remains too long at this point, the wound will fester, because of the extension of the syphilis which is in the intestines, as we have said, for it is extended, then softened and swollen, and the place opens up; and it is cured by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is cured with iron in this way: and you must make the patient lie on his back between your hands, then cut into the place of the rupture, filled with salt according to the amount of three fingers; then draw out the syphilis which is under the skin, then take the thread and put it over the visible place of the syphilis; and press it deep into the abdomen, then sew up the two visible places of the syphilis on the head of the thread, and sew them both; then pull out the head of the thread, and do not cut into the syphilis or extend anything, as I have made you aware in the cure for a rupture of the intestines; then cure it with the cure for wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, clean and treat the wound until it heals.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The syphilis is restrained, and has no appearance in the buttock, and the cautery is more effective in this area, and closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of softening the skin of the testicles
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the testicles becomes soft in some men because the parts inside become soft, and it is milky in appearance; and when one wishes to treat it, one should make the patient lie on his back, and cut the soft skin over the scrotum; then sew together the two edges of the wound with a single stitch, or two stitches or four, firmly; then cut between the stitches, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, and remove the sutures.
dou chastrement	chastisement
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	You should know that castration is forbidden in our law, and for this reason I would prefer not to mention it in this book; but it is necessary for two reasons. The first is so that physicians can answer questions about it, and know how to perform the operation; the second is because we often have need of castrating certain animals to help us, such as bucks, rams, and horses and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that castration is performed in two ways: either by twisting, or by cutting.Chastremens fait selonc l’atraction des testicules, et de la chair qui est entre li codis et li testicules; car il n’est pas necessaire que tu fasses fendre selonc li testicules ou selonc la chair, mes ains tu atractions selonc la chair.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the method we perform by twisting, we have the animal sit in warm water until the scrotum becomes soft and dangling; then we squeeze them with our hand until they are pulled back up and we can no longer feel them.Et quant la chair soit atrainie tant qu’elle soit lieve et que li testicules soient remontiez, tu les retreins tout a ta main si fort qu’il te poit, si com tu ferois un fil d’or ou d’argent; puis retreins les testicules si fort qu’il te point, si com tu ferois li testicules.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Of the castration of a male: you should hold the animal and press the scrotum in your left hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and cup each testicle with one hand, when you have scooped them well; and leave some pus from the syphilis and the subtle syphilis which is on the vessels; and this method of castration is gentler than that made by attraction, because with attraction something of the testicles may remain, making the animal desire lust; then cure the wound until it heals.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways in men: one is that between the two testicles there appears as the figure of a woman, with hair, and sometimes it urinates like a man; another is where a man has the appearance of a woman but with male genitalia, and in this case, he has no sperm.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way occurs in women, where there is a penis and testicles above the vagina.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment of men and women is that you dress the wounds on their genitals, and treat them as other wounds; in the second manner, of men whose urine leaks through the skin of their scrotums, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the testicles
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	A tentingene is a wound on the natural part, as far as it is too ugly to look at; and some women have them as large as a hand, and that is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	You should dye the excess of the tentingene with your hand or nails, and cover it lightly; and do not go too deep, lest bleeding occur, then cure other wounds until it is healed; and for another wound that arises at the mouth of the wound, and use it, and perhaps it will fester, and is according to the appearance of a boil, and therefore the ancients called it the "cow disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you need to treat it, as we have said, perform the ten-tige, and the treatment until it is healed.
de erratique	of erratica
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratique is when the nature of a woman is not understood, or the opening is small; it can be natural from birth, or accidental due to illness where it occurs; or it could be caused by a foreign object, or an ulcer that is thin or thick, and forms a deep wound in the womb, or on the sides, or below, wherever it may be; and they should understand conception and childbirth, and sometimes flowers too; and knowledge of this comes from observing a woman's dance.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the stoppers are visible nearby, you can reach them with your fingers or a stick.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a thin ulcer and it is close to the lips, you can treat it like this: put your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then form the lips into a tube so that the thin ulcer is exposed and covered by the stoppers; then take some wool, moisten it in oil, and place it over the area, and have the woman lie at home every day so it does not close up.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the ulcer is hard and thick, then you must cover it with a spatula like a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is of new flesh, then stop it at once and cover it; and have stanching medicines like oak-galls, dragon's blood, incense, and a mixture of egg; then apply a broad piece of linen, so that the wound may not heal over; and let this be for a long time, and then apply a tent of dry linen; then cure with other cures until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when there is new flesh in the wound, it must be covered thus, unless it is an abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For one must not touch an abscess that is in a wound.Si li apestemens est en la marris, si le covient coper et fere sanz touc de fer; car selonc que ce soit encheancrez, li doit on mettre un trusiau d’argent en la tete del aposteme; si sera mievant a l’aposteme.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins from which blood flows freely without a bandage, and when hemorrhoids are old they become thrombosed; and we have already described their appearances like ears, and the signs, and I will now describe those that respond to treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and thrombosed veins, when they are fully formed in the anus, and do not appear to be felt, except for the cure by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the mouth of the anus, which one can feel, are those that one can cure.Quant il sont em parfont et ne sentent mie, si n’est poignante, et il ne puet curer.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is necessary, therefore, to place the woman in a cold room; then the hemorrhoids are pressed with tweezers and the vein cut at its roots; then powder is applied with medications that restrain bleeding, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, and similar things; then her feet are bathed in water for an hour, and then she is placed in cold water; and if bleeding occurs, she should sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate bark, gales, and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and garlic, and make a poultice to be applied to her back.Quant il sont em parfont et non entamer en l’altelul, si li convient boire la manze de saige, et aler sus le chemin, ou c’est grant tort, et li convient boire la manze de seson.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it is stopped, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, then have leeches applied to the back and breasts without bleeding; then take woolen cloth, soak it in juice of plantain or in juice of dogwood with old wine, and apply it to the affected area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has drained, then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red and resembles a hard lump, so it should be covered as I have said; and then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of anal abscesses
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses arise in the body, such as ulcers and pus-filled abscesses and herpes and skin conditions and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have described in the classification.Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary that I discuss in this treatise the hot abscess which occurs in the stomach, which is not one of the abscesses that form in the bowels; and if you wish to know the treatment with fire, then observe whether the abscess is hard at the beginning of its appearance, and filled with heat and fever, and whether it turns red when you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore, do not be in a hurry to pierce it, but let it drain until the pain is relieved; and then have the patient sit on a chair, with two small chairs to lean on, and support his back and press his feet against the ends of his legs; and let his thighs be spread out, and place his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good rope; then suck the abscess towards the right side, and introduce the instrument to open the mouth of the abscess, from which the pus will come out afterwards; and it is necessary that when you introduce this instrument, you insert the rod first to feel the depth of the abscess, so that the instrument does not go in further than it should, and so that it does not hurt the patient; and if the instrument is larger, then cover the depth of the abscess with cloth so that it is not painful to the patient; and one must hold the funnel of the instrument upwards, and tighten the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess is opened and it is done with a gentle hand, then it must be covered with a bandage, or with the spatulum, gently; and when the bowels are evacuated, then you must put into the wound wet dressings in rose oil, or in dry green oil; and place the dressing outside of the wound at the bottom of the wound, and place a poultice over the wound and over the wound a clean linen cloth moistened with water or malva flowers that have been cooked; then heal after two days of ointment, until it is cured; and sometimes raise the wound and the wound by enema of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lilies and aristolochia that have been cooked for a long time; then return to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is sunken in the wound, then you must be careful to avoid burning with hot iron, but heal it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	It is necessary for the midwife to know the appearance of a natural childbirth, and the signs that it is about to occur when you see the woman push downward and desire to smell aromatics; then hasten the baby's emergence; then you will know that this childbirth is according to nature, and the afterbirth will follow with the baby, and the mother's excess fluids will be expelled through proper cleansing; and this one who comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For sometimes the baby comes out feet first, or head first, or by the shoulders, or it may come out upside down, and it might be turned around on its neck, and in other bad positions; so it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and巧in these matters, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the positions and how they should be assisted.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child emerges head-first in a natural delivery, but the woman is struggling and weak, then seat her on a stool or have other women support her. Boil an ointment of olive oil or fenugreek, and use a small spatula (as described below) to gently open the child's mouth:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and split the membranes, and scratch her nail until the fluids that are inside flow out; and press on the woman's abdomen so that the child descends, and if it does not descend, then the woman should be clisterd with a mixture of fenugreek and olive oil; then make her drink and sneeze from pungent substances, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: then the child will come out now.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the hands come out, then you must gently push them back in a little bit at a time; and if they cannot go in, then put the woman on a chair, and raise her feet up high; then tip the chair onto its front legs, and hold the woman so she doesn't fall over; and if the hands still cannot go in, and the child is dead, then scratch the hands with the nail that was mentioned before, and pull out the child, and then reset everything as before.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the birth of a child upon his feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes out upon his feet, then he should be pushed upwards; and then he is turned little by little until he is straightened out; then grab one of his feet and straighten it little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If he jumps up to the crotch, then instruct him to grab hold, and make him sneeze forcefully; if he jumps out, God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it doesn't jump as we have said, then turn it gradually, as long as it is according to its natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is easily done.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if he does not come out as we have described, take musk from the altar, and oil of six months, and melted gum, and grind everything in a mortar; and place some of this ointment upon the womb of the woman, then make her sit in warm water up to her ribs; and when she is warmed underneath, place the collar of myrrh upon her, and tie it beneath, and leave her for an hour; then have her sit upon a chair, then make her sneeze and constrict her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child will come out now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the child emerging onto his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this way, put the midwife's hands on her abdomen little by little; then let her lean on her neck, and let her feet hang down, and let her lie on her back; and fold her hands little by little, and then press her hands on her belly, and take away the cushions underneath, until she is fully delivered; and if the child does not jump out, take her feet and move them gently, then move her belly upwards, then push with your hands; and rock the child gently; and instruct the woman to hold on until the child emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the issue of the child who comes from a wide one hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I will try to bring the hand back: if it cannot be brought back, then make the woman get up and walk; if she cannot walk, then let her lie on the bed, and stretch her legs out straight; then administer the mustard poultice that I have described; and if she does not give birth, then let her sit on a chair, then try to bring the hand back; and rock the child according to its natural shape, and make her sneeze, and instruct her to hold on until the child emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the child's exit from his neck, and has his hands spread out, and his face turned towards his mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I want the assistant to dye his hand, then turn it slowly, and move it gently; and when it is even, put on a poultice of mustard and oil, as we have said, then command her to move it slowly; and when you have done this, make her sit on a chair, and command her to grab something; and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same way with all of the afterbirth
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes out in this way completely, then grasp the afterbirth with your nail, so that the moisture is released; and if the child pushes on its face and neck, grasp it from the mouth, so that it is not retained, and the child dies; then put the child back in, so that you have placed it as it should be, and command the woman to grab something a few times: then it will pop out gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the twin's birth
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are often born, and sometimes there are three or four; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens rarely.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	These are strange things, and do not live, if they are not named; I know that they are multiplied, and are separated by the fluid which divides them, which is bound to the blood; and sometimes they emerge as naturally as a tail, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they emerge strongly, then the surgeon should act as we have said, and be quick and skillful in what he does; and he should do whatever is best for the patient's health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the brain, one or two or three, or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child according to the measure of the glorious sage; and it is necessary that the surgeon knows all this, for by chance something similar might occur; so act according to what is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat a woman for a dead child in the womb, as I have said in the division, and there is no movement, and you are forced to use your hands; then you must know whether the woman is of sound virtue and has no accident or fear of death; then the woman should be laid on her back, with her head inclined downward, and her legs raised; and she should be anointed with the ointment in two parts, or she should lie on the bed so that she is not exposed to the falling of the child; then rub the mouth of the womb with moist oils mixed with thyme and fenugreek and flax seed, then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and ointments; then insert them gently into the womb, then touch the places where the child will descend, keeping watch that the child does not appear on its head; then insert the fingers into her mouth or throat or palace or under the beard or in the armpits or near the ribs; and if the descent is on the feet, touch the heel and the sides; and it is necessary to anoint the finger with ointment and place the curve between the fingers of the left hand, and insert it gently into all the hand, and insert the finger into one of the places we have mentioned until it reaches the empty space; and this is the shape of the finger:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	then place another pin in the other hole, or in a third if you need it, so that the extraction is even; and then press them evenly by moving from one side to the other, for the pins to come out, and let the holes be teeth-like to hold the pins in, as shown in the illustration:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if any part remains, anoint the fingernail with oil and rub it in that part, and pull the other part; and if nothing remains, put the pin higher up, and do this until it comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be pulled back due to the dislocation, then you must wrap a cloth around it, until it is healed; then apply the cupping on the palm or on the wrist, and you should do the same for the other hand, and also for the feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the child's head is large and it is straining to come out, or if it has a sharp pain gathered in its head, then you should put the spathumile between your fingers, open up the head, and extract the fluid; or you may use the instrument called 'almidach', from which the mold comes with the instruments that follow this one. And so also do if the child has a large natural head; and then pull the bones apart with tweezers, and if the head pops out and is forced, let it split until the fluids that are in the birth canal flow out; and if it cannot come out, pierce it into pieces as much as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you should pierce it so that the fluids run out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the swelling is on his feet, the pulse is light, and the healing is swift at the mouth of the wound.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is straining in the belly or vagina, then you should draw it out wrapped in a cloth held by your hand; and open up the belly or vagina so that the fluids within flow out; and if other parts are stuck and the head remains inside, then insert the tip of your finger into the back of the mouth, and pull it towards the front; then insert a nail or two, and pull it out; and if there is an abscess in the back of the throat causing narrowing, then one should not work on it, but rather apply moist and greasy substances; and administer poultices, and use warm and softening fluids.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is on its side, and you can bring it to an equal level, then do as we said about the living child; but if one cannot, then cut it into pieces and leave nothing of the afterbirth.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if the treatment for abscesses that come in childbirth is administered, and blood flow occurs, it should be stopped with a string, and other treatments should be applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly some children had been dead, then another was sewn onto it, and the others died too.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came to her in the groin, and swelled so much that it burst open, and began to emit a foul odor.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the priest, and I thought long, and could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a strong attracting plaster, and an bone came out, and after a few days, some more.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very surprised because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I wanted to investigate the wound, and I felt around inside with my hands until the woman was in a better state; she lived for a long time afterwards, and then one day she suddenly died; and I don't recall this chapter being used except that when masters encounter something strange, they know how to provide relief.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the dislocated back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here after comes the form of the press, to which one applies books; and at .2. turns for .2. chaps of .2. strings.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Nevertheless, the horn should be more slender than the restrictor, and it should be made of boxwood or ebony; and the mouth of the tube should be two fingers wide, and its edges should be half a palm long; and in both ends there should be two adjustments of this same wood, which are fixed in one end and moveable in the other, about half a palm long or a little more; and these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the woman to open it when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, with its appearance more subtle and lighter, is made of ebony wood or boxwood, according to the appearance of tongs; and has at both ends two adjustments, as you see, a palm long, and two digits wide; and when you see open the wound all over the instrument, then let the woman lie on the bed, her feet hanging and her legs open, then fit the two adjustments together in the wound, and hold the head of the instrument between her thighs; then work your hand over the instrument, as you have done with tongs similarly, according to the amount that you see open the mouth of the wound, until the woman does what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all tipped and have multiplied their appearances; and when the surgeon has prepared them, the work is faster and higher in men due to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despair of the instrument that you have not prepared, for its necessity is inexcusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you should instruct the patient to hold in her breath and then make her sneeze with a scent, and pinch her hands to her mouth and nose; and if she excretes through this, all is well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, he takes a pot and makes an opening in the lid, and puts herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, such as wormwood, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in water over fire; then he puts a tube into the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the wound, and blocks it so that the vapors go into the wound; then he makes him sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	Then let the pus drain freely.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment and is not discharged, as it should be, then command the midwife to moisten her left hand with oil of ass's milk or with the mucilage of alder bark, and then put it into the womb, and seek out the placenta; and when she has found it, she should grasp it and extend it little by little straight down, so that the wound is not stretched on extraction; but it must be moved gently to the right and left, and then pulled out; it will come out and be discharged.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the disease is narrow, we have spoken of the cure for sneezing and the fumigation of herbs; but if it is not cured by all that we have said, be sure not to play with the bowels; but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the disease, you tie it to the thigh of the woman, then cleanse it with ointment of four-fold medication; she will then evacuate and recover, but nevertheless, when she evacuates, a bad odor comes to the stomach and head, and damages the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore one should use suitable fumigations: some of the ancients have tried fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The instrument used to fumigate the woman for retained placenta and afterbirth is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	It is like glass in appearance, and one puts the thin end into the body, and the broad end above the fire; and the fumigation is above the coals, and the stain until it is wasted away, and another begins again.
de percier lou fondement	of piercing the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have their anus pierced, but the rectum is closed with a thin membrane: therefore it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that membrane with her finger, and not with an instrument, and to keep the membrane from being torn; then she should put moist linen in wine and oil, and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will heal, then place a wooden plug in the hole, and leave it for several days, and remove it when the child wants to go inside.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes the healing of a wound or abscess comes suddenly; so it must be covered suddenly: then it should be dressed, as we have said, with a plug of wood.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the fistula in the anus
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from under the anus are nodular, and grow larger than those that come from within the anus, or in the space between the two parts, whether there is one fistula or several; and when this nodulation is old, it opens, and usually emits white moisture or thin pus, and sometimes these fistulas are suppurating. They are perceived by the patient either in egestion or flatulence when the patient makes an egestaion, and occasionally a break occurs in one of them.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that pierce up to the bladder, and up to halfway down the penis; and they reach up to the joint of the thigh, and up to the head of the cow.Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And so one knows whether the fistula at the anus is suppurating or not; and it is known when you press your finger into the anus, and push a thin needle made of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is twisting, one pushes in a thin tent of lead, or horsehair, as far as you can feel the tent or hair with your finger; and if you do not feel it, and no egestion or flatulence occurs, as we have said, then you know that it has not pierced through; so be quick about curing it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula has pierced to the bladder or the passage of urine, then the urine flows out and cannot be stopped by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is perforated up to the joint of the thigh, then the vein will also be affected up to that spot; if there is tortuosity and pain throughout, then it has become bow-legged, and ointments are of no use either immediately or after some time; in these persisting fistulas, there is no cure other than labor and the vanity of foolish people who interfere.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In one that is not perforated and is not old, there is hope of recovery through cauterization with iron, as I have experienced; the patient should lie on his back, and the physician should hold his legs up to his thighs, tilting his thighs toward his belly; then a tent made of bronze or lead should be inserted if there is tortuosity, until you know where the vein is.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it in the buttock, then you should insert your index finger if the vein is not perforated; and if you feel something between your finger and the flesh, then you know that it is perforated and cannot be cured by this method.Li tentures de ceste fistre sont perciez a la jointure des cuixes, et a l’estreme fin del tenture, li tendens se part en deux parties: une descende ad la fistre, et l’autre mont ad leu.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One can still heal some of them, but it happens rarely; and the help one gives, one burns the cautery subtly according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before; and fill it all with hot water in the fistula, so that it reaches the fundament; and do this two or three times, until you know that the false flesh is burned, which looks like a bird's feather; and then cure it with wet bandages of lamb's wool, until this flesh comes out, then cure it with ointment to join and heal.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is healed in this way, that is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it cannot be healed in any other way; and if the tent goes inside and does not pierce to the anus which is at the fundament, and there is a thick covering of false flesh or syphac between your finger and the tent, and you see the fistula below this covering towards the bottom; then cut off the beginning of the fistula, and fill it up in front of the tent, and then burn with the cautery afterwards, so that it reaches the top of the tent; and the tent will be released and fall out; then scrape away this false flesh which looks like a bird's feather, and nothing will remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the pus runs, and cuts between your finger and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or with medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For fire cautery brings together two things: namely, the scorching of the flesh and the zastoning of blood and the drying up of moisture; then the treatment of moist tents with tallow or ground-up substances until the bowels gush out and the charred flesh emerges from the bowels; then treat the wound with quick-drying ointments on hard charcoal, and these are dry remedies.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes all the way from the anus, and is separated from the body, put your finger into it and probe it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent and within it is pus or flesh or charcoal, and it is ready to pierce through, then have strong hope and expectation through one of three treatments: either cauterize it as we have said, or cut it all the way down to the bottom; or if you can, place tents in there and treat it as before; do not go too deep, lest you pierce the lining that holds up the bottom, and let the discharge come out through the passageway; then treat it as before; perhaps it will be healed. Or remove that covering and cleanse it after cutting away from the bottom, either with tents or another pointed instrument; then dry up that diseased flesh in the wound, and keep the fistula from the part above the bottom: thus the ailment will be easier to bear.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes a fistula is formed in this way; and when you pierce the skin over the fistula, it is on the side of the fundament near the skin above, then take a needle pierced at the top in this shape:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And he ties .a. twisted thread in ii, and ties the thread all the way into the fistula until it reaches the root.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it pierces through the margin of the fundament inside, then pull out the thread from that opening so that you pierce your finger in the fundament; and pull on the thread's end, and bring the two heads together, and squeeze them together, and let it be for a day or two; and sometimes they squeeze it until the threads pick up the bits between them, and they cure the wound until it is sewn up and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not drain, then have it drained in every way you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not advisable to bandage the wound so tightly and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spiny spatulum that is used to pierce a fistula is very sharp on one side, and not on the other; because it does not pick up what it should not, as you can see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two types: either they are inside the anus, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and some discharge blood, and there may be one or more of them, and they are outside the anus and at the top of the anus; but those that are outside have little moisture, and sometimes a little yellow water or a little blood, and they are the color of the body. The treatment for those who have them inside the anus is to command the patient to strain while going to the toilet until the hemorrhoids come out and the threads appear; then you hurry and grab it with tweezers, or hold it with your fingernail, then cut it at its root; and if the tweezers cannot hold it because of moisture, they grab it with a piece of cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chamois leather; and pull it out with their fingers, then cut it, and put some hot powder on top that is in the place of cauterization; or you can cauterize them as mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, then treat other hemorrhoids until it is healed; and if the anus cannot come out, then cleanse the patient with a sharp and harsh enema to wash away what is inside the anus so that it can come out clearly; when the patient strains, and if the hemorrhoid comes out of the anus, then the cure is easy; and you grab it with your fingernail or tweezers, cut it, then treat it as we have said until it is healed and fears incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then you should administer the stitch in this way: take a twisted thread, and put it through a needle, then pull the thread from above, and pierce the needle from the other side; turn both ends of the thread underneath the needle, and let it be loose; then tighten the thread, tie it, pull out the needle, and do likewise for all others, and leave one to absorb the excess blood; then put a moistened cloth in rose oil or cerate over the wound, and command the patient to rest; then let him remain until he feels better, and when he is healed, treat him with ointment and other remedies.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	from dryness of the vagina or anus
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is dryness of the bowels in the intestines, and through constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then you should cut off the skin at the tip of a spatulum or your nail, so that it does not retain moisture; then treat it until it scabs over as it should; and if it cannot scab, then repeat the scraping more forcefully than before, until it heals a great deal, and is scraped; then treat it until it is healed.
dou fremit	where it trembles
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Ant is a small appearance formed under the body, and goes very deep; and sometimes the cold freezes it, and one feels it as if dead from trembling, and it comes throughout the body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a cane of an goose feather, or a strong vulture feather, and place this cane on the trembling, until the purple circle trembles all around; then turn your hand over the entire cane as you touch all around the trembling, and push it deeply, and pull out the trembling by its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see fit to make this instrument of a feather of iron or steel according to this shape, and have it finely polished beneath and drawn above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not pierce it, so that it can be held in the hand and pressed firmly. And if you see fit to cauterize the vein, as described earlier in this chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes an enema is made of silver or bronze, or melted copper or brass; and sometimes these instruments are small and large, depending on who they are administered to.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those that are administered to children and the weak and painful are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the enema, whether small or large, is inserted widely into the stomach, according to this method:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and has a decrease where the belly is tied, as you see, and the anus is pierced inside; and it has two holes on one side, and one on the other; and the belly is where one puts the medicines in a beast's bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small holes, and there is one inch of space between each hole, then tie in these holes a strong thread of twisted thread in an X or around, and assemble the belly as if it were a goat; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then colonoscopy; and this is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	Let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head with oil or egg white, or similar, then insert it gently; then the minister should squeeze his two hands together until he is completely empty, then remove the enema, and let the patient lie on his side, and if the medicine wants to come out, let him defecate as much as he can; and if he sleeps for a night afterwards, that is even better.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you syringe him for a disorder of the stomach, and the medicine rushes out, then he should do it again until he is cured.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are in the anus or rectum, then the enema should be as thin as for a child; and this is how to make a thin enema that tightens the skin:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already discussed in the division of the treatment of wounds; now we will discuss the treatments by hand and medicine, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and according to what makes them.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by the impact of a stone, or by sword and knife, or lance, staff, or arrow, or similar; or they may be made according to the places in the body, such as a wound that bleeds from the neck, head, foot, belly, liver, and similar members; and I will tell you how to cure each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds of the head, because their memory will come in their chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, one must be careful if it is due to a stone or similar object, and the skin is still intact but the wound is large, and you suspect a hot abscess: then have him bleed from the cephalic vein immediately if there is little blood coming from the wound, and let the bleeding be in the opposite direction of the injured part; and let the patient avoid fullness from wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to bleed, then let his food be diminished, and do not drink wine or eat meat; and put on the wound, if hot abscesses come, cotton moistened only in rose oil, or in stiptic wine; and if there is no hot abscess, then put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it has not been moved by air, a powder that I will describe shortly; and if it has been moved by arson, then put on some ointments until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like that of a sword, and the lips cannot be brought together with tenting, then bring them together by suturing, as I will describe for abdominal wounds.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to the bone, and it can be covered by only a little flesh, then close it with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as testicles and cooked wheat, as well as meat, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find pus in the skin, and it does not reach the bone, then scrape away all the pus, and wash it out, and then cure the wound; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which bleeds profusely, and cannot be staunched by medicine, then tie it off with a thread; and if that does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is easy; you must apply this powder that will heal as soon as it has burned.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the method for the powder is as follows: take one part incense; two parts dragon's blood; three parts quicklime, and mix the powder finely, and apply it to the wound, and hold it firmly in place until it dries well and joins back together with its own blood; and then bind it up well, and leave it untied, if it is not swollen; for one should not remove the medicine until the wound is healed.Et se li plaie n’ait grant paor, et il ne peut demorer tant qu’ele soit sanee, si covient il que tu tu le traites per la cauterizacions des grans, ou si cuit en la plaie os de mort, ou os de bete morte, ou os de bete vive, ou os de chietif homme; car ce fu fait a Romme et en altre païs.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one does this with chalk alone, when one doesn't have incense or dragon's blood, but that the wound is moved by the fire.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the burn has moved the wound, stay in the same place, but do not put any powder on it; rather, apply some digestive ointments, or barley flour made from water and honey, until it becomes soft; then heal with other healing remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if a fracture comes with the wound and it is small, I will draw it out with subtle pincers; and I will tell you about fractures of the head later.
de la plaie dou col	about the wound on the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is a nerve, do not treat it at all, and do not apply anything constricting, because it harms the nerves and makes them withdraw; and do not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member; but let the medicine be warm, as in the case of a wash made from water and honey, and cooked with rosemary oil, and also washed in warm water, and other stones according to this method, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, cut and bind it, then heal it.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is deep and it is swollen and full of pus, then pierce it or a lower place; and if the artery is cut and bleeding ensues, then ligature and cauterize as needed; and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the windpipe, and the food passage is blocked, by which the meat goes, then press the windpipe on the Adam's apple, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then compress it gently, and leave it for some days, then treat it with ointments that promote sloughing until it heals; and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then trepan it; and if there are bone fragments, then remove all those you can, and leave those you cannot reach until the wound granulates and the sinus drains; and if the wound is fresh, then apply powder to the powder I have described.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, treat it as I described in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of a wound from a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a blow from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then examine whether the wound bleeds at all: then you will know that the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, then do not put the powder on it in the first hour, nor bind it for the bleeding which will cease by itself, and return to the body, and heal the patient; but apply an attractive ointment, and change it twice a day; and if you do not have an ointment, then place old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture, and let the patient sleep with his head on the wound for three days, or four, or more; then no spasms, nor tremors of the body, nor constrictions of the throat will come; and when you see good signs, then you will know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat it with poultices and other remedies until it heals; and if it cannot heal, and the wound remains open, then you know that there is a fistula; treat it accordingly as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is superficial, in the front or back, then treat it as one does for wounds in those areas; if it is large, close it with stitches; and if it is small, treat it with powder; and if it has penetrated deep into the bone, and broken off pieces, then clean the wound, and extract any foreign objects; and for other wounds in other parts of the body, follow the method we have described.
dou derrompement dou ventre	a hernia
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	There are great, medium, and small rupture wounds in the belly; from a large wound sometimes the intestines, or the nerves of the intestines, are exposed, causing an external injury; and stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one because one must stitch up the intestines more carefully, going from warm to cool; for the intestines swell as soon as they feel cold, and return more easily to their place when warmed gradually; thus a small wound is often better than a large one, for one can reset the intestines more gently to their proper place than with larger wounds. And know that there are four types of belly wounds: the two common stitches occur in belly wounds, and the stitches for other wounds on the body; and yet they are more suited to belly wounds, and I will describe each type:
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and something of the intestines has come out, and it is easy to put back, it can be done in two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this way: moisten a sponge or a soft cloth in lukewarm water, or cook in squint-water and cyprus and spikenard, and rose the intestines until the swelling is removed; and sometimes this wine restringent is made, and it is poured solely to reduce the swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling leaving, moisten the intestines with water or old wine in which mallows have been cooked, for there is an allergy to the entrance of a little thing; and if it cannot enter, make a small hole in the wound with the instrument by which one cuts hemorrhoids; and the first cure is better than cutting, which no one should do without great need; and that instrument serves to split it: so cut inside without breaking it out, and see the form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, then put them back in according to their natural shape in their proper place, if you have the strength, because this is best.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And when the wound is low in the belly, you should make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is under the belly, put the head and feet higher than the lower parts, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, then put the wounded part higher than the other; and thus you should arrange what I say for large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, use what is appropriate for you, then hold in your hand a piece of linen which covers the entire rupture with one hand, and bring together the lips; and that is the common way to sew, and is that you pierce an needle or more, according to the quantity of the breadth of the wound, then leave at the head of the wound I finger's space, and insert a needle where there is a good strong thread; and pierce the two sides of the skin with the two sides of the subcutaneous tissue, which is under the skin inside, so that you make it pierce that part, and bring together the two heads of the subcutaneous tissue all four together; then tie the thread around the needle from both sides, then bring together the two sides of the wound comfortably, and then leave one finger's space, and insert another needle; then tie the thread as you did for the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you need in needles, so that all the wound is restrained; and the needles should be medium, between thin and thick, because thin needles cut all the flesh, and very thick ones cannot enter well: therefore they should be medium; and you should not push the needles too far into the flesh and the skin, so that they cut and open the wound before it is sewn; and then tie the ends of the needles, so that they do not hurt the patient when sleeping, and put tents or bands on the ends of the needles to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed; and this method of sewing with needles is most suitable for small wounds, because it only requires one needle or two. The second sewing is common, and is that you bring together the two sides of the skin and the two sides of the subcutaneous tissue together on a needle where there is a strong medium thread; and when you have pierced these sides all four together, then bring the needle back to the part where you started, in the manner that one sews clothes; and put a finger's space between each stitch, the thickness of a thumb; this sewing heals the person, and I sewed a wound that a man had on his belly, which was cut by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm wide, and the intestines were exposed two palms wide, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned his intestines after they had been outside for 24 hours, and the wound was sewn up for 15 days, and I treated him, and he recovered.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And they looked at him and judged that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I didn't treat him with ointment because I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine; and I placed old cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he recovered.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you the two proper methods of suturing: take the needle and pierce it through the skin from the outside until it reaches the inside; then, once it has pierced through to the inside, pull the thread through so that it exits on the other side of the wound. The understanding of this method of suturing is such that you sew just like a tailor sews a piece of cloth, and you leave the thread hanging on one side, then grab it from the other, until the entire wound is sewn shut.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of sewing, which Galen describes correctly, is like how one joins two pieces of cloth together naturally, by applying the tip of one thread to the other, as follows: insert a needle at the tip of the thread, and pierce only that spot, leaving the two ends of the thread; then turn the needle and pierce from the outside in, all the way through to the inside, going through both pieces of cloth at the tip of the thread; then pierce both sides of the cloth from the outside in, going through to the inside, at two other points on the thread that are on the opposite side; this is the correct method of sewing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen describes this, and some testify to it: one should sew the belly with two needles, with thread in both; then one pushes one needle from one side, and the other from the other, as those who sew rotten cloth; know that when the rupture is in the belly, the sewing is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds: and it is that when you find the fresh wound all its blood, so that the burn has moved, then put back the intestines, and the fabric; then put on the powder of charcoal, and if the burn has moved, then put on any ointment that is present, until the wound heals; and cut the threads, and sew the fac, and the mirach; then cure the wound as the others, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicine, put it on immediately when it starts to heal, old cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you don't need any other medicine in various positions when the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound makes community with the principal members, then you should moisten light linen in warm tempered oil, or in rose oil, and put it around the angles, and under the armpits; and if he feels pain or swelling in the bowels, and it happens many times, then enema with warm red wine, and likewise if the swelling comes just to the intestines; and pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines, which are called "young", cannot heal when they are raw, and this is due to the thinness of the veins through which they run, and the subtlety of the whole body, and their proximity to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the muscle jumps out of the wound, then put it back as you would with the intestines, while it is fresh; and if it is old and has become green or black, then you should tie up the black area so that no blood flow comes from it, for there are veins and arteries there; then cut what is between the ligature, and hang the two ends down from the part below the wound to aid extraction when the muscle slips out, and the wound is open.
de la routure dou boueil	of the boiling route
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestines are pierced, and the wound is small, then one can heal it in some people, for I saw a man who was stabbed in the belly with a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became swollen and a fistula formed, and through it came digestion and flatulence; I applied a dressing according to what I could, and did not cease to treat it until he was healed and the wounds closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him sweating, I doubted that the patient had pain in his belly; but he had no pain, but remained in better condition, eating and drinking; and some experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in such a way: take a thread from a great testicle, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the thread has opened its mouth, put it on the two lips so that it strains his mouth shut; and then tie the head of the thread, and it will stay so that it cannot come undone, then put another thread after in the same way as before, until the wound is completely closed; and then cut the thread.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the wound is in the intestine and no harm comes to the patient, one can sew up the intestine with a fine thread cut from an animal's intestine in such a way: take the end of this intestine thread, which should be very thin, and tie it to a fine twisted thread, then thread the needle and sew up the wound, and bring the two ends together; and this method of sewing with threads is good only according to the way of faith and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestines, there is no healing other than by subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it wakes up, is universally called a "fistula", and especially when it is swollen and becomes bow-shaped.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is according to the green knotted node, hard and white, where there is no pain, and is as swollen as the feather of a bird; sometimes it is clear and bowed, and sometimes thick; sometimes small, and sometimes large enough; and I have already spoken about this in the division of wounds, that any wound which is not healed, and there is no pus, happens only due to one of nine causes: namely, because of the deficiency of blood or flesh; or because of evil; or because there is hard matter within, and on the surface, that does not allow pus to form; or there is too much swelling; or the place is porous, and the matter is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good in its treatment; or because the corruption is a type of pestilence; or due to the nature of the region, digestion and healing are slow, and there is swelling; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, their signs, and the medical treatments in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now I must tell you about the treatment of a fistula that is done by hand.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	You should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and from arteries, and from nerves, or from the syphilis, or from the intestines, or from the bladder, or from any of the ribs, or from the spine of the back, or from any joint of the hands or feet; and they can also affect the primary organ itself, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are in this way are of great harm to health, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come to a point where I have said, and you trust its cure, and see it to be known, then take an iron or bronze tent, if the fistula is straight, so take it; and if the fistula is crooked, then seek with a slender tent of lead, for the lead bends according to the crookedness; and if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot properly explore it by tents, then cleanse it through one of the openings by enema, for moisture passes from one opening to another, and cleanses it; then press it hard with your hand, so that you know if there is bone or nerve, and feel how deep it is, and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you press his hand, and where he feels it most; and when you truly know the location, whether it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or any of the places I have mentioned, then treat it as I have instructed, and remove any foulness and putrid matter that remains within; then cure it until it is healed. And if the fistula is very deep in a straight place, you should treat it as deeply as possible, then moisten tents with medicinal water, and insert them into the fistula up to its head, so that the medicine corrodes the excess matter at the bottom; then apply soothing ointments to promote healthy flesh, until it is healed; if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said. And if any bone is damaged by the fistula, then treat it as I have instructed.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If the vein or nerve does not bother the limbs, as we have said, and if the bone is exposed and there is decay and blackness, then treat it with king's yellow until the decay is gone, then cure it with things that are soothing until it heals; and if it does not heal, and returns to how it was before, know that you have not gone deep enough: then expose and dig until you reach the bottom, and remove all the decay, then restore the joint; and if it heals, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the decay is too deep for you to reach; then there is no other remedy but to let nature take its course; and if there is a small corrupt bone, and you can pull it out with tweezers, then extract it with the appropriate instrument for this purpose, and if there are many bones, pull them all out, and do not leave any behind; and if the moisture causes a contrarity, and there is no doubt or fear, then cut and dry, and apply soothing substances, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then place something over the wound to promote suppuration, and let it fester around the bones, and then the bones will come loose more easily; and if it is a large bone, such as the leg or thigh, then cut away only the rotten part until all the blackness is gone, and then heal the wound; and if much of the bone is腐敗 and it reaches down to the marrow of the bone, then it must be scraped and covered over completely down to the corruption, and then it should be treated until it heals. And I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you can take example and help from this in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	He was a young man of about 30 years who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so that the matter came to his leg and it became swollen with a large abscess, and there was no reason to drain it; but the doctors, through their folly, did so much work on it that the abscess burst, and much matter flowed out, and it became a fistula, and many openings appeared all over his body from which matter and blood flowed; and many doctors treated him for two years, and there was no wise surgeon in the art of the hand, so I was called to him, and I saw his leg and the remedies with which he was being treated, and what flowed from the openings into a great wound; and the young man's body became red, and had a yellow color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I set up a tent in one of the holes, and then searched all the holes, and found that one came against another from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hurried, therefore, and probed one of the holes until I uncovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption extended to the bone within; I cleansed what appeared to me of the corrupted bone, and believed that there was no other corruption except that which I removed; and then I began to heal the wound with dry medicines for a long time, but could not close it; so I began again, and uncovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and cleansed it, and then removed it, and labored to close the place; but I could not, until I probed around a palm of the bone, and drew it out entirely, then healed it with medicines; and it was healed and closed quickly, and there was no need to repeat the operation except for the weakness of the patient who could not endure, and for the fear of death that I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Because of the bloodletting, he often bled, but he was completely healed, and in place of the bone, a hard lump grew, and he had a good disposition and did not have any harm or contrary effects in any way, neither when lying down nor when getting up.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken anywhere in the body, one should treat it in this way: take a thread, and tie it to the head of the open bone, and instruct someone to pull it upward; and place another piece of linen larger than the first thread, and tie it over the lump that is above the bone, and draw the lump downward so that you draw out the corrupted flesh underneath, and uncover the flesh above where you see fit, so that the thread does not cut into the flesh; and place a hot iron or a board underneath the bone to cover the corrupted flesh; and one must keep tying it as far as one can see and feel the corruption, and tie it again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is broken and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover all of the flesh; then place a fire underneath, and then connect the two parts of the corruption, and pierce through to the length of the corruption, as we have said; and if the corruption is at the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and join the bone on the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of both joints, then there is no other way to treat it than to cut; and if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, this is a very difficult thing, but nonetheless you must investigate the corrosion, how it presents itself; and cleanse it in every way that you can, but so that the vein or nerve do not harm you; and know that there are many tools for cutting these bones, according to the arrangement of the bones, and their appearance, thickness, subtlety, size, and smallness, and their hardness; and therefore one must prepare a tool for each appearance of work; and know that the work will show you the tool which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of illnesses; then choose the tool which you need according to what is appropriate.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The heads can be injured either from within or from without; and when you have treated this injury with remedies but they do not help, then you must cover the affected limb up to where the injury is located, so that the patient escapes death by the greater evil, which is the defect in the limb; and the sign is that the limb becomes black, as if burnt by fire, and then the blackness appears, after which the injury spreads from limb to limb, affecting the whole body; so be quick to cover it, and if the cause is the sting of some venomous creature like a sea scorpion or adder or similar, and the injury is on the head, then cover it and do not give it space to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it reaches the hand, then cover it at the joint so that the injury does not reach the arm; and if it reaches the arm, then cover it at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is fatal, and there is no remedy beyond the measure of its strength; and so you do with an injury to the foot: if it reaches the first joint, then cover it after the other joint; and if it reaches the foot, then cover the whole foot; and if it rises into the leg, then cover at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no remedy except to tie the limb with a bandage, and extend one of the bandages downward and another bandage upward, and you separate the flesh between the two bandages with a spatula as wide as a penny, so that the bone is uncovered; then cover and bind it, and place a linen cloth on each side so that the binding does not touch the healthy part, and does not cause the patient any further injury or abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if there is bleeding when you operate, cauterize the area firmly, or apply some restraining powders; then return to your treatment until it is complete, then tie the injured limb with a suitable ligature, and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man in his sleep: he had a discoloration that looked like a burn, and this corrosion first appeared on his big toe, spreading throughout his foot; and when the man saw the corrosion, he covered his foot, and it healed; and a long time after, the corrosion reappeared on his finger, and he came to me, and I applied some reflective remedies after cleansing the body, but he could not stop the corrosions; and he wanted me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to, as I had no hope of stopping the matter; and I also feared that if I cut off his hand, he would die, for the man's vitality was weak; and he despaired completely, returned to his land, covered his hand, and it healed; and I have only told this story so that others may learn from it if they need to.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	At times an abscess forms in a fleshy area, and remains so long that it causes a great gathering of pus; then it ruptures and pierces, and the pus flows out, leaving the place hollow like a vessel; and the skin above is as thin as a piece of cloth, and does not heal to the bone or nerve; such a disease is called a 'sore', and not a 'fistula'; but if it becomes so extended that it reaches the bone deeply, then it is called a 'fistula'; and the skin is such that you can grasp it all around, and especially when it is thin, like a piece of cloth; and it does not heal over by itself.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you have reason to believe that the skin is healing and the corruption is not deep, but the flesh is thick, then treat it with a clyster thus: look to see if the breast is swollen and the pus has an odorous smell, then clyster with Egyptian medicine which is made in this way: take equal parts of asafoeida, oil and litarge, and put them into a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and as thick as honey; then take some according to your need, dissolve it in water and honey, and clyster the breast and press out the pus; leave the medicine in for two hours, then expel it by squeezing; do this several times until the breast is cleansed and the sore healed; sometimes you may use clysters of ash water when Egyptian medicine is not available: take vinegar ashes of vine wood, pour water over them, let it stand and strain out the liquid, and use to clyster the breast until you see that it is cleansed; if the patient cannot bear the Egyptian medicine or ash water, then use a clyster of water and honey with a little litarge ground in it; or clyster with honey and wine where the honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and the wine makes the sore dry; and when you have done this and seen that the breast is cleansed, then clyster with something that causes flesh to grow in it, and take diaphanous plaster, mix it with rose oil and wine, or use some other medicine or ointment of which I have spoken concerning their properties in the section on ointments; if the opening of the breast is small so that the clyster cannnot enter, then enlarge it a little with iron, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment, as far as it can reach; if the wound is too large, cut away only enough to allow entry of the clyster where the opening that drains pus is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Because when the bowels are in perfect health, one should not leave excrement inside; and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish, then arrange things so that the bowels move to the lowest place they can, for when the bowels are healthy, one should not leave excrement inside, and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish, then arrange things in such a way that the bowels move slightly downward, and do not leave anything of the bowels; take consolidating medicines to put on the wound, and place them on the linen cloth that covers the entire wound; then cover the most forceful spot of the breast where it is widest compared to the first one, then apply an ointment on the other cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and place it over the wound to ease the bowels, but do not remove the large cloth for several days; and that which is placed over the wound, remove often to remove the bowels, and know what comes out of the bowels, whether it is venom or pus or enough, or digested, or undigested; take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has extended in such a way and you see the nature that rises on the wound, then know that the breast is healing, and approach the sana. Then loosen it in the morning, or midday, and when you loosen the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast milk flows badly after many days, know that the breast does not heal.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons spread after a long time, do not despair of health, for health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are people whose wounds fester for a long time with putrefying flesh, and others who have the opposite condition; and if indigested food sits in the stomach for many days, know that the stomach is not healing; and if the stomach takes a long time to heal and is distant, then apply dry medicines that are moist in substance but dry in virtue, such as diaphanous ointment, for it contains a large amount of vitriole, and it is the best medicine; take diaphanous ointment and mix it with rose oil, and rose water made from old wine, equal in substance; then cook it and use it; and if you do not have diaphanous ointment available, you can use honey cooked with oil, and when you do not have that, take myrrh, aloe, and incense, grind them into a powder over the honey while it is on the fire; then apply this to a cloth and place it on the stomach, and sometimes an aristology is administered for a long time, as well as roots of celestial lilies, which are like flour made from fava beans and centaury; and use simples or compositions: grind them into a powder and mix with the honey I mentioned, then use it; and if the fistula takes a long time to heal and is not healed by this treatment, then know that the corruption has reached the bone, or to the hard tissues, or to the soft tissues; and then follow the fistula treatment as we have described earlier.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that arises underneath the nail of the finger or toe, or sometimes in other places; and when it becomes infected, and no attention is paid to it, then a hard abscess forms, and it runs and seeps beneath the nail, all the way to the root of the nail, and sometimes even further; and it eats away at the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the area around the joint becomes swollen, and the color is discolored.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have described in the section on treatment, and the treatment does not help, then you must cut away all the excess tissue that is remaining under the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cautery is a great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is also healthy; and if the nail is pressing on the flesh, and starting to grow over it, then you must put a piece of cloth under the nail so that it does not touch the flesh, and tie it up above, and carefully cut away the dead flesh, and apply burning and corrosive medicines to remove all of it; then treat the wound with ointments until it heals.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	If the corrosion is in the bone, cut it out and pull it out, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal; and if you see the tooth decay, cut it out at the gum, as has been said before, then cure it until it is healed; and if it is infected and pus-filled, causing great pain, you must treat it first; then cut the nail of the finger with an angle cut from above, and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh under the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if this happens, place something to soothe it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the deafness of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two joints that grow on the hands of some men by chance are all fleshy, and sometimes there is bone, and sometimes a nail, and sometimes they grow at the root of the joint, or in one of our fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those born with a hernia in the navel do not move, but those born with one at the joint of the neck may move; the size of the one from the fleshy part is slight and should be cut at its root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure; if you hold it tightly, it will stop bleeding.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For one born with a hernia in the rear navel, you must first cut around the flesh circularly to the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate thread for that, then cure it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joints that come together come from birth, or from the joining of a wound, or from arson, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Then you must cut that suture so that the intestines return to their natural shape; then place between two wet tents or cloths moistened in rose oil, so that they do not adhere; or between two pieces of thin plank, until the skin is sutured, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If swelling comes to either of his hands with the palm, then cut that wound as it should be.
des vils	the poor
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Veins are large tubes wrapped in full of melancholy superfluities, which come in many parts of the body; and they occur more in legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should administer to him a purgative, and then the basilicum herb.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment with fire is in two ways: one is that you cut the skin and draw out the black blood; the other way is that you open a vein and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The incision is done this way: first heat the leg with very hot water until the large veins are dilated, then stretch the leg from above the thigh to below the knee; then cut the skin in one place, or two or three, with a wide incision, then open and draw out the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the patient can tolerate; then ligate it, and command that he eat meat with garlic mixed with black pepper; and start the evacuation and bleeding again when the incisions are healed, and rest.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The treatment of dislocation is as follows: raise the leg of the patient, if there is a lot of hair, then put it in the bath, and heat the leg with hot water until it turns red and the veins swell; and if you do not have a bath, then heat it over the fire, and then press on the vein from the top to the knee, or in the part below the ankle; then open the skin at the nail, and scorch the vein on each side, until it appears when one feels it; and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white cord; then pour water under it, so that it is lifted from the skin, and then press it gently at another nail; then press another incision, or more if you need to, then lift and press it at the toe, then draw and lift it up to the second incision; then pull it out from incision to incision, until it is all out, then press it; and if you cannot pull and lift it, then insert a very strong double thread with a needle, tie it and pull it, and pour water under the thread, and turn your hand from side to side, so that it comes out; and be careful not to cut it, because if it is cut, it cannot be pulled or lifted, and it brings harm to the patient; and when you have treated it all, then place moist wool soaked in wine and rose oil over the wound site; and dress it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the wound is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it twistedly, but do not cut it; and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron used to split a wound is curved, and does not cut into the vein; it is a broad curve, for if it were slender, it would cut the vein, but it should be large as we have said, and thus is its shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is twisted in the legs, in dry regions where no herbs or trees grow, and in land with no moisture; and it sometimes appears elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens from the growth of porridge-like substances that come under the skin, just as snakes and worms emerge within the body, twisting between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this wound are that a great inflammation comes in the leg, then the place changes, and the wound begins to come out forcibly, just like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the shoulder opens, you should wrap a piece of woolen cloth around it from 3 and a half to 4 inches, and tie it, and leave the cloth hanging on the leg, and every time it comes out, wrap it around the cloth again, and if it is too long, cut off some, and wrap around the rest, but do not cover the root while it is still coming out; because if you cover it, it will go back into the flesh, and cause an abscess and swelling in that place, and a serious illness; therefore this wound should be treated little by little until it is all healed; sometimes it is as much as 5 or 10 palm-lengths long, and once I had a patient whose wound was 10 palm-lengths long, and when you cover it, it makes a hole, and pierces right to the bottom, so that everything comes out; then the matter inside should be emptied, and soothing medicines applied to the place for a day or two, and then it is treated like an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes this vein bleeds profusely, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or the leg, and a lot of pus comes out, and from which it rains; therefore treat it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that grow between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called "cattle disease" in our land because it often affects oxen, and it is a small worm that grows between skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body, going up and down, and is felt everywhere as it moves from one limb to another until it breaks the skin where it goes, and bursts out; and it is caused by the putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms, snakes, leeches, and roundworms grow in the belly; and there is fear of its malice, for when it travels through the body and goes up to the head, it may enter the eye and destroy it, and this often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being cured and drawn out, you cannot help but when he urinates: therefore you must tie the place above and below with a strong ligature tightly, then press on it from above and draw it out forcefully; and if the pus is deep in the flesh, and you do not draw it out, cauterize it with fire until it comes out; and the greatest harm that it does is that it runs into the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming near to the eye, tightly constrict under it the eyelid, then press on it from above and draw it out forcefully; and one must use the cleansing of the body with soluble medicines for the putrid humors, and a diet of warming foods to produce urine.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from flatulence
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called "vomiting" in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in some members, and then moves from member to member; and I saw what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and I uncovered her arm, and saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and a little later, I saw it rise up her shoulder as quickly as a worm, faster than anything, as bright as silver when it moves from one place to another; the pain left that spot, and settled in her shoulder, and then a little later spread throughout her body, until it reached her other arm; then she told me that she was spinning around her body, just as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled greatly how she moved from limb to limb in this manner, for I had never seen this illness act in this way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Nevertheless, I have seen many whose pain moved from one place to another, but I did not see it in the woman; and I thought that it was because she had a dry body, and her veins were exposed, and so this windiness manifested itself constrainedly; and it did not appear that way according to this reason to those who are delicate, and have moist bodies and relaxed veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see to treat this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then press above and below gently, and then apply a compress until that forced wind is released; and cauterize the area; and if you do not see it yourself, then treat it with those who dislodge winds, such as foul pills, and serapin pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse according to their appearance and according to where they land on the body.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The varieties of them are that there are some with large points, and small, and curved, and straight; and some with two angles, and some with tongues, and some with pieces; and those which break in any limb fall according to two manners: either in a principal limb, such as brain, heart, liver, lung, spleen, intestine, bladder, and similar limbs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When she falls in any of these places on the body, and the sign of death that I will tell you about appears: then you should be careful about removing this arrow, because death comes afterward in many dispositions; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not fully embedded, then pull it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain is when the arrow pierces the bone and hits the brain, it is when there is scotomata and confusion and trembling and red face, and inflammation and reddening of the tongue, and spasm and disturbed mind, and vomiting of phlegm; and perhaps there is discharge from the nose or ears; and perhaps they lose their speech and voice; and out of the wound comes white moisture that looks like pulp, and also as bruised flesh; and if this sign appears to you, then stop the treatment and pull out the arrow if it is not already out.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The signs of a seizure when it occurs in the heart are that it is close to the left breast, and feels as though it were pierced by a hard object, and is not visible; and sometimes the seizure is silent like the pulse, and emits black blood, and there is chilliness and cold sweat, and syncope: so you should know without doubt that death is near.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that never leaves the lung is that there is no pain from foam coming from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes heavily and seeks the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow hits the cover of the foot, it is between the small ribs; and it causes great pain and great discomfort and breathing difficulties; and all the limbs from the shoulders are affected.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow hits the stomach, by chance some indigestible meat may come out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow pierces the chest or belly, and no feces come out through the intestines, then there is no hope of a cure, nor of extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow pierces the bladder, and urine comes out and escapes, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, elbow, spine of the back, hip, thigh and legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to various dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you how to do this.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	A certain person had a seizure that fell into the jaw in the root of the nose; I treated it, and released it below the fat of the ear, and was cured without any trace.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And I treated a person with a seizure that fell into the fat of the eye below, under the eyelid, and the seizure was retracted, and only its tip could be seen from the nose; the seizure was as large as an arrowhead, but very thin without ears; the person was cured and no ill effects occurred.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And I took an arrow out of the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow that went into his ears; I removed the barbs and extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I also took out an arrow from a man's home that had gone into his belly, and I thought he was going to die; but after thirty days passed, his condition did not change for the worse; so I cut into the arrow, inserted something into it, extracted it, and he had no bad outcome.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a person who has an arrow stuck in his back, and the wound is sewn up on top of it; as long as the arrow remains inside him, and his natural functions remain unchanged, and he experiences no harm in any of his natural processes, then:
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	You will see another man who has an arrow in his face, and the wound is sewn up; he remains like this without suffering great pain, and there are many other similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And I treated an arrow wound in the home of the prince the king, which had pierced his eye, and was slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrow was fully withdrawn after three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I applied a subtle cautery to it, and did not feel anything; but he felt a piercing pain beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the point of the arrow. I placed a soothing and digestive poultice on the site to prevent inflammation of the wound; and I saw the wound of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the poultice again and again, and the wound healed quickly, but the man felt the arrow inside his eye for a long time; and he told me so.Apres ceu que li fu la saiette cheue, je alai a sa cure, et trovi le home en gran dolor et mult estroite de la plaie, si com me dist; et il m’otreit mult de l’ongle del doigt quare il se frotteit les euus.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it was open, and probed it, and felt the tip of the arrowhead which was embedded; then I inserted the medicine into the opening of the wound until the head of the arrow became clearly visible; and the wound healed completely within four months, and then I lanced it, and pulled with tweezers from both sides, but it would not come out; therefore I did not cease to apply subtle instruments and devices in various ways, until one day I was able to grasp it with well-made tweezers, according to the shape that will be described at the end of this chapter, and so I extracted it and healed the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And those who saw it judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored; therefore I restored it, and the wound was closed and the patient completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you may put your treatment on what I do not say, because books cannot encompass everything; but wise masters reason well about very few things, and about what they are present and lacking, they devise new work and new instruments, at the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows grow in the members where they are stuck in two ways: either by the place where they enter or by another part; and that which goes out by the place where it enters is an arrow entering into fleshy parts, and sometimes goes out now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not go out now, then leave it as long as the flesh around it becomes rotten and the outlet is relieved; and also if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, then leave it for several days, and move it every day; and then it will come out, and if it does not, then pierce through to the very tip of the forest, so that the holes around it become enlarged, and then pull it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	If the arrow is lodged in the bone of the skull and pierces through to one of the brain's ventricles, and if any of the signs I have described manifest in the patient, then do not extract it; rather, let it remain until it becomes even with the surface after a few days. For if the arrow reaches the brain, this is certain death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is lodged only in the bone and does not reach the brain, and the patient survives for several days without any adverse signs, then attempt extraction.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very deep and cannot come out, then administer cauterizations around it as I have told you; then treat the area until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is lodged deep in the body and cannot be seen, then probe for it throughout the wound; and if you feel it, extract it with an appropriate instrument. And if, due to the depth of the wound and the penetration of the arrow, there is no bone, nerve, or vein in the way, then open the wound widely; and if there are ears or barbs on the arrowhead that are holding it in place, carefully remove the flesh around them from both sides as much as you can, then break or bend the ears so that you can extract the arrow. Be careful not to break the arrow while extracting it, lest you push it further in.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot in one go, then leave it until around the joint is swollen; then draw it out, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	If the bleeding persists in spite of your efforts to stop it, then follow what we have said about treating the wound in its own chapter; and be careful to avoid cutting into a nerve or opening a vein, and draw out the arrow as quickly, firmly, and gently as you can; and put the patient back into the position he was in when the arrow struck him, for that is the best way to help him. If you cannot do this, then at least put him into the position indicated by the wound.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	An arrow that comes from another direction, or where something can be seen or felt underneath the skin: cut into it with a knife until the clamp can grip it, and then pull it out; if it won't come out right away, try again later.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is caught in the bone, then rotate your hand swiftly as far as it will go into the bone and widen the opening, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	If it cannot be pulled out, then leave it and try again later; if part of the arrow is exposed, push it all the way in; if only the tip is showing, and you can see that there is some room to manipulate it, then slide the tip of your instrument into the wound so that the arrow tip enters the groove of your instrument; then pull it out, and if the arrow is stuck in the instrument, push the instrument all the way in to ease its extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	If the arrow has struck a vein, you must cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, and then treat the wound as it should be.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If the arrow hits the leg or foot or belly or bladder or side, and it is deep, and you can cut above it, do so; but be careful not to cut the vein or nerve, and then extract the arrow, and cut the wound open if necessary, and treat it until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the forceps used to treat arrow wounds resembles an owl's beak, and here is its shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many types: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrowhead.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrowhead is like the feather on an arrow, to catch at the tip of the arrow, just as it is shaped.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of tongs for gripping and probing is thus:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are 31 veins from which one can bleed, and in the head there are 16 of them: two that are behind the ears, called the "ear-veins"; and two arteries in the temples, visible; and two veins that are in the corners of the eyes, called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the root of the nose; and the two veins in the neck; and two veins that are above the lip, and these are the veins called "age-herbs"; and two veins below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	Veins are commonly used for healing in each arm: one is the cephalic vein, located on the left rib cage, and ordinary people call it "vein of the head"; the middle one is called the "fast", composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and ordinary people call it the "vein of the heart"; the basilic vein is located on the right rib cage, and ordinary people call it the "vein of the belly", and it is above the cubital fossa, and it is the one used for healing, which clearly opens above the elbow.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the salvatelle is the vein between the auricular and annular veins, and there are two rains in it; and in the leg and foot, there are three veins: one is below the bend of the left rib cage, and the second sophene vein is at the ankle of the right rib cage; and the vein called  "nesse" is at the ankle of the other rib cage; and in the other leg, there are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The bleeding of the veins that are behind the ears is helped by old catarrhs and by emigration; and the qualities of the bleedings, as I have told you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then press the patient's neck to a vise, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending on the head: grasp them with your thumb, and where you feel the pulse under your thumb, sign there; then take the lance, and insert it beneath the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand to all of the vein upstream, and pierce through both skin and vein well with your thumbnail, and make the blood come out; then press and ligate it, until it is healed; and I have already said about the incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The bleeding of the two arteries that are in the temples, it helps to cure old migrain, and headache, and habitual ophthalmia, and ague in the eyes; and the quality of the bleeding is as I said: and it is that the patient turns his neck, so that the two veins appear clearly; and feel the pulse under your thumb, and then sign on; then raise the heart above the vein at the top of your index finger, and insert the lancet underneath, and raise the vein above, and cup it, as you have done in the other veins, and let the blood according to your need; then loosen the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it; and then bind it tightly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of their binding and their extraction, at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The bleeding of the vein in the forehead is as good as the bleeding of the cephalic vein for old facial diseases, and for мигрень, and for redness; and its qualities are such that the patient turns his neck until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fosseur", of which this is the shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point upon the vein, and press up with your hand, or something else, and let the blood issue according to the quantity that you see; then release the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healed, and sometimes the operation is performed with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not advisable for the flames to be too small; and heal it crookedly, because the bone is close by, and accidentally break the flames when they are thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The bleeding of the two veins that are in the temples helps with eyes, and with тин, and with redness, and with an eyelash in the eye, and with facial diseases; and the qualities of their bleeding are such that the patient turns his neck by twisting some ligament, as before; then bleed him, and let the bleeding be through a small hole, with a wide flame, for there is no flesh there.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are thin, they might break; then draw out the blood, as much as you need to, and then tie it up with a thread, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The bleeding of the vein in the nose is good for a cold, and a violent fever, and facial diseases, such as a migraine and redness that comes in the face, and especially when it is chronic; and the quality of the bleeding is such that the patient squeezes his nose, then pulls his ears to the left hand, and takes a long, thin flame, and inserts it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well otherwise, and the blood will begin to flow now; and do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then tie it off overnight, for it is quickly restored; and this is the shape of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The bleeding of the two sinuses helps with laryngitis, and the beginning of hoarseness, and many diseases, and pemphigus, and corroding sores, and herpes, and stomatitis; and the quality of the bleeding is such that the patient squeezes his neck from side to side, as we have said; and let the master stand above the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a chair, then bleed the vein a little widely at first, then draw the blood gently, or as much as is needed; then do the same in the other vein, then loosen the ligature, and gently squeeze both veins so that the patient does not choke; and let him be until the morning, so that the wound can heal.
de la sainie des leivres	of bleeding gums
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The bleeding of the veins of the lips helps with ulcers in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and splitting of the lips, and toothache and gum pain.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the nature of bleeding is to have the patient sit facing you and to hold his head as I have said; then turn up the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, which can be recognized because they are black and because there are thin black veins around them: press both of them, and if you cannot recognize them and you doubt which they are, press the largest vein on each side; and do the same with the two veins above and below, for it is the same procedure.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of bleeding under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The bleeding of the veins that are under the tongue is helped after the bleeding of the head, and it is in the constriction of the throat, and in diseases of the eye, and in diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the bleed is such that the patient lies between your hands facing the sun, and you loosen the tongue, and look underneath on each side for a black vein: therefore heal one and the other, and do not go too deep, because beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the neck that are commonly bled are bled in two ways: either with a pointed mirtin [flame], wide or olive-shaped and very fine, called 'anesil'; they are wide or fine according to the width and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the steel needle is very important, and it should be as thick as a thumb:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the flat veins with a lot of visible thick blood, and those that contain thick and troubled blood; and this is the shape of the olive-shaped flame.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more pointed and sharp, and is used to lance delicate veins, where there is delicate yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps diseases that are beneath the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly; and the surgeon must cut it bleeding, and he must cauterize the artery that is underneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he pierces the artery and bleeding ensues, it must be staunched as I have said; and the flame must not be gripped but snipped like a thread.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilic does not open clearly, you must stretch it and change to another; or you take some of it, or you cut the vein in its place in the arm: it opens clearly; and grip the flame gently, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you wish to know the place of the cut, you must stretch the arm, and touch the spot until you feel the pulse; then mark the spot on the inside, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein with the flame gently; and be careful not to pierce the artery when you see the spot puffed up, for that is the artery: avoid it therefore.Et li sainiez de la veine qu’est entre les deux mambres, et qui est la costez del col; si covient a l’usager que il saine saignement; et qu’il warse l’artere qui li est desoz, et qui est sus le poilz.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it rise up as high as a child's urine, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is arterial blood: therefore hasten, and put your finger on it for a long time, then take away your finger if it stops; bind the arm, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient; and let him be in fear, and do not move him until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood is not staunched and it flows, and you have no medicine at hand, then press upon the artery to open it, for that is where the blood retreats, and staunch the flow.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Take a piece of ficus, and split it, and take one half and bind it on well until the next day; if the bleeding stops, that is good; if not, then treat it, as we have said, with powdery substances that stop bleeding; and stopping the bleeding is not harmful in many cases because of the small size of the wound, and because of the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The bleeding of the vein in the middle [of the arm] is helped by causing blood to flow from the head above and the body below, because it is composed of basil and cephalium, as we have said; and the surgeon must be careful not to pierce too deeply, and if he does, and hits the nerve, and it swells and the bones are bruised, and perhaps cannot heal; and this nerve often opens, and if it doesn't in some men because of its subtlety, then you should treat it with a silencing instrument; and protect the nerve to the best of your ability.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, they will make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The bleeding of the cephalium is helped by causing blood to flow from the head and helping the eyes; and it must be bled with a flame of olive oil or a flame of myrrh, for it is the safest of all veins, because it has no nerves or arteries beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Nevertheless, one must seek the lightest place and cause no grief if it fails the first time, then try again; perhaps the places will swell in some men if they fail the first time, but it causes no harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of bleeding depends on your thoughts.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you should know about bleeding is that it is not done until after maintaining health and preventing future illnesses; and bleeding should be performed in one of the three veins: the head, the arm, or the base of the palm; and bleeding should be performed at the beginning of Lent, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of digestion are apparent; and bleeding should be performed on the first or third day, after two or three hours of the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	Bleeding that is administered for illnesses does not have a set time, but whenever there is a need during the day or night, in all hours and at all times; and one must not bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor women carrying after the fourth month until the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should the very old who have passed 60 years be bled.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone wants to be bled, in whatever way it may be, one must cleanse the intestines with a gentle enema if he has retained much feces, so that the veins do not draw harmful, excess fluids from the intestines into the main limbs; one does not bleed those who are bloated from eating too much meat, or who are drunk, unless they have abstained for some time, nor the sickly and the weak; and one must not bleed after a colic attack, vomiting, diarrhea, and frequent intercourse with a woman, nor after excessive exertion, watching all night, or fasting, nor those whose strength has been depleted by an injury to their limbs or their body; then gently cleanse the humors through food, drink, and medicine if you have the skill; then enter the bath if nothing else will help to cleanse the blood, and be bled around the navel on the third day, as we have said; and guard against exertion, pain, and lust that day; and be calm and cheerful, and let the person being bled lie higher than the bleeder, and rub the arm two or three times, then gently tighten the ligature above the middle, for if it is too tight or too loose, it will not draw out the blood; then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell and you feel them; then moisten the bleeder's flame with a little old oil, then place the tip of his left-hand index finger over that vein below where he wants to bleed, so that the vein does not shrink away from the blade.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	Because there are veins that flow like cords to the armpit, and some that are filled with winds, so that when one puts it over the flame, it draws back from the flame and cannot open the vein, and thus one is of those; and if he opens the vein, the wound is too tight, therefore the surgeon must be skillful in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens the first time, that is good; if not, then try again a little lower on the same spot, or above, if the area is swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the arm is swollen, and the patient is frightened, leave it for a day or two, and do not bind the arm: perhaps hot abscesses will form; do not enter into the bath, then restart the bleeding if she pleases; and if the opening is small, let the blood flow gently and subtly through it, and you doubt that it does not flow as much blood as you want, then apply the flame directly to that small opening; and work gently, so that the arm is swollen; because this happens many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the place swollen, do not re-open the wound, but put a little lamp oil on it, for it lightens the body of blood, and in this place the oil is changed into fat; and thus administer lamp oil to each vein that you open, to stop the flow of blood; and the same thing happens to water and milk when one puts them on the wound; but subtly the blood and milk split when they are too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there is a large abscess that often occurs, especially when the opening of the vein is small, be quick and put a sponge soaked in warm water on the wound for an hour; and you should do this after the flow of blood from the vein has stopped, and if there remains blackness or green color at the site for several days, it will not harm him; and if you see anything, apply a remedy made from aloe or myrrh dissolved in water.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there is an abscess and appearance of pus at the site of the basilic vein; therefore, place your hand on it, and if you feel the area soft to the touch upon compression with your hand, then that appearance is bad.Et si tu veis, met sus le leu esponge moillie et chaut, ou l’estraincture de la main, si ne tu veis aucune noiror ou verdor;
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore be sure not to put anything on it of what we have said, for by chance it might enter an artery; but let him make a dry plaster to harden the spot, then heal it with another healing, until it is cured.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw from each person blood according to the quantity of his virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for one who is full and swollen, and needs bloodletting, that a larger wound is made, and the flames should be wide; and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and they should be bled little and often, and one should bleed them by cutting across, not piercing; and this bleeding method is safe from blood loss and nerve damage, and it is better than bleeding long or wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for one whose body needs bleeding, one should give them moist bread in pomegranate juice; if they are hot-tempered, then take blood three or four times. And if of a cold complexion, eat moist bread in muzed syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, and well-scented syrup before bleeding.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints after the loss of a lot of blood, he should drink warm broth and subtle aromatic syrup, and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the opening of the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to bleed his arm again and again, then when it is weakened by excessive bleeding, he should bleed a little bit at a time according to the amount of his continued strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And those who want to bleed their arms again after the first bleeding, and they have strong bodies, should bleed again after seven hours, or after nine hours.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who wants to bleed elsewhere, it must bleed on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is much blood within the body which has been heated, and fever arises; therefore one must draw off a large quantity, and widen the vein until it drips gently; then you should check all the conditions of bleeding, and put your hand on his pulse while he bleeds, so that death does not come from the place of the vein, and this happens many times when the surgeon is negligent; and one must not press hard on the vein when you see the arm loosening and bleeding for a second time, and the vein is closed, but one should press gently; nor if it is crooked, should he stretch out his arm forcefully, for that would be bad; but let him remain as he is while he bleeds for a second time; or one should apply the point of the cautery flame until the congealed blood at the vein opening melts away, and put a little salt dissolved in water on it, and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	If a vein is swollen, leave it and do not constrict it until the abscess has been drained.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	If necessary, bleed a second time in the same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	Veins in the arm are bled in the area of the vein in the head because it is more complex.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of bleeding is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the vein turns red; then let it be handled gently so that the vein appears clearly, then bleed now from the side, not from the top or bottom; and make the cut wide, and bleed close to the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot come out, put the hand back in hot water and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough; and if it is in the winter, do not put the hand back in hot water, because it is put in more in the winter than in the summer; and bleeding from this vein is safer than from any other vein, as there are no arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	Bleeding the救命 vein of the right hand is beneficial for all liver diseases, and this is how it is done: stretch out the hand, and put it in hot water until the vein swells, which one can see; then bleed from the side, and if you close it completely, it will do no harm; and do not go too deep because the nerves are completely naked beneath the skin. Then put the hand back in hot water if the blood congeals in the wound and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as needed, put oil and silk on the vein to seal it quickly, and do the same for each vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The bleeding in the left hand is beneficial for the disease of the right side, and do everything as I have told you for the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The medicine of the sophia is good for all diseases that are under the body, such as diseases of the stomach, and retention of fluids, and diseases of the kidneys, and the thighs and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of its medicine are such that the patient puts his foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it breaks, and applies it to the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, and up the foot, they go a lot of rains; therefore heal it at the largest vein, or at the ankle, which heals better.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal it on the foot, then beware of the nerves that are underneath, and heal it across as well by coping; and let the flames be ανέσυλη.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water, and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the healer fails the first time, then he should try again the second time above a little, because the place is salty; do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus do with the sophia of the other foot similarly.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The site of the sciatic vein is at the ankle, and its cure lies in the pain of the hip when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its healing is that the patient enters the bath, and twists the ankle three times upwards, for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then heal it in every way you can, and by crossing over; and it is better to cover it, for the part is safe, and it is very relaxed in many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not wash it, then heal any vein that opens on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and be careful of the nerves; and make the blood flow until you see it, and then loosen the bandage, and put on cotton and compress it; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of cupping treatments
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Leches are made of horns, or iron, or glass; and bleeding is done according to 2 methods: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping which is done by burning is in two ways: with fire or without fire; and the cupping that is done by burning and by bloodletting is performed in 14 places on the body, of which one is entirely at the top of the head; and the other is in the neck; and two others are on either side of the neck; and the cupping under the chin; and the cupping on both shoulders; and the cupping over the hips; and the cupping among the two arms; and the cupping on the two legs; and the cupping on the two ankles; and the cupping is not performed for bloodletting, except for small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and because of this it does not weaken at all, as with bloodletting from a vein; and it should not be administered, neither with fire nor without fire, in any disease that comes from fullness, until the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if, due to necessity or habit, one must bleed, then we treat them every hour at the beginning or end of the month, in summer and in every season; for there are some who, when they need to bleed, feel a heavy head; and there are some who experience fullness and redness in their face, head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes; and some who experience a drop of blood in their mouth, have a swollen tongue, and taste blood; and there are those who faint, see things that are not there, and experience pain and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially when it is during the month, we command them to fast after 3 hours in the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The bleeding of the nose helps with headaches ... that come to the eyes, and it must not be after the evacuation of the whole body; and this bleeding is in the place of the cephalic, and one who has a cold complexion or catarrh should not use it, for it does them great harm; and therefore the old should not use it, nor those who have cold diseases in their head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often heal from it become oblate, and for this reason the cupping should be placed a little lower down due to the risk of oblateness.Car li veillart et cil qui ont chief froides maladies, si conviennent que les ventoses soient plus avals sur la cephalique, car ce lor fait grant bem;
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation in the neck is located where the jugular vein and basilic vein are, and because of this, it helps with constriction of the foot, and with splitting of the channels of the lungs, and with vomiting, and with repletion; and one should not push on it too much, for if it is pressed too firmly, it affects the throat and stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventilations at the sides of the neck help with headache and eye pain and migraine, and with strangulation, and with toothache, and they are located where the basilic vein is; and you should instruct the surgeon to express his hand when placing it, so that he does not compress the artery and cause a flow of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	Ventilation under the chin is good for mouth diseases and gum corruption and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the area of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Ventilation on the shoulders is good for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The ventilations in the armpits are like three veins in the arm, for they draw blood from those large veins; and command the surgeon not to pierce too deeply, for under the skin there are nerves and arteries.Li ventosation dou chef alerge tant a l’estrecement des ners com a la sainie de la veine dou chief; et est as III costelz, et covient que li sainors si mette le doigt et li tienne fermement, qu’il ne se mueve.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping glass that is placed on the buttock is useful for hemorrhoids and other diseases underneath, and it should be large, made of brass, and well-suctioning; and by chance, if it is fragile, it may break and cause great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	Cupping glasses on the legs heal very well, as they draw blood from the whole body; and they are useful for old pains in the kidneys, and for diseases of the stomach, and of the bladder, and they bring relief to flowers; and they are located at the .2nd sophene, and at the .2nd ankle, and all the while they weaken the body after a long time, and bring on fainting in many dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying the cupping glass is to place it first empty, and suck gently, and apply firmly, and move evenly, and do not cease doing this until you see the spot red and swollen, and the blood appears; then stop, and remove the cups, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are those who have thin skin and wide pores: one must strike only once, and one must make large wounds, and a little deep; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, then one must strike twice: the first time to subtilize the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very thick, then one must strike a third time; and when we want to draw blood a little at a time, we only need to strike once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want a lot of blood, we will re-bleed frequently; and if the blood is thick, pierce it with a needle, and the areas where the veins are to be pierced suddenly, and it suits those who have tough and hard skin and narrow pores that you grease the ends of the cupping glasses with aperitif and dissolutive oil: if it is in the summer, with violet oil, or with sweet almond oil, or with squash seed oil; and if it's winter, use watercress oil, or lily, or chamomile, or similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the suppuration is thick and cold, then take marigold oil, or balsamite oil, or dill oil, and similar oils.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the patient has tender skin and wide pores, no oil is needed, but it should be washed after cupping with rosewater, or cold water, or mulberry water, or squash water, or porcelain water, or similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have a lot of moisture should also use parsley, or water from the myrtle tree, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large swollen areas are raised by old wine, or by water of suc, or by decoction of aniseed or chamomile, or other similar things; and it is not good to bleed with a cupping glass before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and do not sleep after being bled, and they must keep themselves warm when they are being bled and when they have been bled.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And watch if the person who is being bled is colicky, and if the blood is too thin and inflamed; then they should eat cool things such as pomegranates and endives and lettuce with garlic, and similar things; and soft foods, and the flesh of young animals, and moist foods.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those with a cold complexion should drink honey syrup, and moderately old but not too old wine, which is between old and new, and soft foods, and soft young birds and pigeons; and on the day that they are bled, they should drink more than they eat; and it is good to give some people rose water or musk rose water before or after bleeding to comfort the main organs; and the blood should be thin but not for those who have a hot complexion.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The cupping glasses that are placed without burning are those that are placed on the liver, and on the mumps, and on the gout, and on the belly, and the groin, and the thighs, and the hip; for these members do not bear to be burned, and it is only done in order to attract blood from one member to another, as we place them on the breasts when the nipples are healthy; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we place cupping glasses on the belly and on the groin to reduce the member; and it removes pain when there is congestion or a stone, and by its attractive power it may draw out the congestion, or drive away the stone from its place; and thus it acts when one places it on the liver and on the mumps when there is retained flatulence, and these cupping glasses are administered empty in order to suck only; and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water, as in diseases of the pleurisy, and in this way one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the fire cupping is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it is two fingers wide and a half palm deep, and on the sides around the middle there is a small hole, as well as for pushing a needle, and it should be made of bronze, smooth in front so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb; and in the middle there is a crossbar of bronze or iron, to place a candle, and they are large and small according to the illnesses and the age of those who take them; for the ventouses of children are different from the old, and of the thin from the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one should thus place this ventouse on the limb: take the candle of wax or the ointment, and place it within the ventouse through the bar in the middle of the ventouse, so that the light is at the bottom of the ventouse and does not burn the patient; and then place it on the limb, and your fingers must be on the hole we mentioned, so that when one wishes, the vapor goes out, and one removes the ventouse; and they take the ointment as before, and repeat it often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	Therefore the cupping-glass which is applied for the disease of pleurisy, for all acute diseases, has no rod nor aperture, and it is not removed until it is full of water, and is placed on the limb only; and that is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Leeches are not removed until they are in fresh, clear water without any dirt, and they are put only on members where cupping-glasses cannot be used because of their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and on bare flesh, such as the teeth or nose, and others like them; and the way to use them is that when you find leeches which are in clear, fresh water without any dirt, you take them; and put one in clear water, until they become accustomed and have nothing in their guts; and then let it be bled from a vein and cupped, then rub the member until it turns red, and put the leeches on it; and when they are full and move, if it is a place where a cupping-glass can be used, let it be used, for that is much better.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, then lift the place with ash, and then with water, very well, and then squeeze it out; and if the vein heals too close to the body of the leech, moisten a linen cloth in cold water, and apply it so that the leech is constricted; and if the bleeding increases, then apply powdered vitriol, or gall, and similar things, until it is stopped; or place half a handful of peas over the spot, and leave them until they turn green on the spot, and it will now stop; and if you need more, take other leeches.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the leeches will not attach, then rub the bleeding spot with fresh blood, or prick it with a needle so that the blood flows, and then apply them, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will attach; and when you see that they are defecating, then powder over the spot some powdered aloes and salt, or ashes, and they will stop now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and is a remedy for fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that the fools who despise this chapter have never seen any of the ancient books or read any letters; and because of this, knowledge is strange in our land, for I have never found any good ones. And I know nothing except through the knowledge of ancient books, in which I have studied so much that I have gained knowledge, and through experiment and the custom of my life. And I have described to you in this chapter what is contained in it, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, just as I did in the two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we should say in the prologue of this book the subjects of the discourse and the chapters where the sage sets his understanding, and dwells on their truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or crushing occurs in someone, you should quickly treat the patient from one side and the other, if nothing else prevents it, such as weakness of the body, or old age, or being very cold; or if the weather is very hot or too cold. Eat cool foods, that is, cold meats, and deer and squirrel meat, and do not drink wine or eat any fatty foods, and do not fill yourself with food that fills the veins with blood, until you have thought of a hot abscess, or of an expansion of matter in the limb; then let the patient return to their previous diet.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, then one should nourish the patient with foods that promote swelling, or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and testicles, and feet, and cow's placenta, and offal, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with such swelling the fracture is stopped up and heals more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that broken bones in the old and decrepit cannot be well healed or joined according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are also too tender, such as the bones of young children; but have no care, reset the broken bone, binding it tightly with large tendons that stretch and join the limb together, so that it is as forced as it was before; and do not stop at all in his work, and for this he should eat plenty of meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And you should know that there are various types of fractures in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot or leg; and I will tell you in this chapter about all types of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another one that is superficial, just like the cut of a quill pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And there is a fracture with a wound, and a complete fracture is a small split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And for each type there is its own technique and proper instrument in the restoration, according to what the memory comes to mind; and one can tell that the bone is broken when it is twisted, and clearly appears deformed, and buzzes when pressed by the hand; and when there is no twisting or deformity, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture; but there may be a twisting, or splitting, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You must not move it by hand, but apply remedies that follow, then hold it steady with a gentle grip.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And you should know that the fracture which goes towards the root, and where the two parts are separated, they must now be put back together evenly, so that hot abscesses can form; and if cold abscesses form, then leave it for a day, until the abscess is relieved; then put it back into alignment as easily and quickly as you can, and know that the restoration of this one is easier than the restoration of the one where there are pieces; then hold it tight, as it should be done afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if there are broken pieces of bone, whether it be in two parts, or in the hand or foot, or in your hand if it is a small member, or in two tendons, or in one tendon and your hand; and put the member back into its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the member are separated, you bring them back together by all means possible, and be careful that your work does not cause injury or pain to the patient; and adjust the two heads of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel it with your hand if it does not seem right; then adjust it well, and do not pull or press too hard as those do who cause hot abscesses and contractions in the member through their actions, as we have seen many times.Et s’il est desaloiee par cause de moistor ou de fureur, si le ramene en sa leu, et il ne puet y demorer, si le remet a leu si com il doit etre;
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the member is at its worst, then treat the patient well so that he does not move it, either while awake or sleeping, turning or in any other way; and be careful that the member is so secure that he feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, then it is not at its worst, and you should put him in such a position that he feels no pain; and be careful that he is straightened out, so that no crookedness comes to him when he is restored; and the quality of the broken member is according to what I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken members vary in size, shape, and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Because there are small members, like arms and fingers and the like: these should be wrapped with soft, fine linen; and for larger ones, such as thighs and legs, use a broad, sturdy bandage, since broad bandages embrace all of the large member and constrict it evenly from all sides, so that no swelling remains; then wind soft pads around it, three or four times according to the size of the member, and press your hand gently on all of the bandage, then go above the break and constrict it less, until the break recedes a little; then soften the bandage little by little, until you hold most of the healthy part, then take another bandage and wind it again around the broken part; then go back to the part below the break and constrict it gently, neither too hard nor too softly, as we have said above in the first hour; then place pads or linen between the bandages, until they are all even, then bind everything on top with a bandage, and then put your splints well-made on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, apply something hot that soothes the abscess and reduces the swelling; leave it like this for several days. Then, place it over a fire, and let it be of half the thickness of a large cane, or of wood used for making clubs, or of palm tree branches, and let it be shaped thus:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But the splint that one puts on the fracture should be a little thicker and wider than the others; it should also be as long as necessary for the smallness or size of the limb; then tighten it over the splints just as you did at first, and then tie a thread over it appropriately, just as in the case of the first fracture; the tighter it is, the better; and the threads should be thin, neither too thick nor too fine, and they should be made of soft flax; for if the threads are thick, as I have seen foolish people make their laces with twisted cords, it is a great error, for the binding cannot be equal if it is too thin.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is wounded on the head by the stars after the binding, place underneath woolen or linen bandages so that it does not blister.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by a fracture, and the bones are broken, I will describe the treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And you should not attempt to straighten all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the member is swollen, it should not be bandaged for more than five or seven days, or longer depending on the heat of the abscess; and here is the method of ancient poultices for healing fractures, dislocations, and twists: take flour from the walls of the mill and mix it with abundant egg, and apply this preparation, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it. This is the common method of poultice that heals fractures in various conditions, and especially in women and small children, for it is not too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of plaster to restore the fracture and dislocation and twisting: take 3 parts rose oil, 1 part each of myrrh and aloe, 8 parts alechi, and in powder, mix with egg white; if the person's complexion is hot, use this plaster, as it has a good composition and restores broken bones quickly, and is suitable for many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of poultice that is good for twists: take mastic and balsam of galahad, each 10 grams; myrrh and aloes, each 7 grams; açafrão, 6 grams; Armenian bole, 10 grams, and grind well, and mix with water or abundant egg, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method of ointment for joints and bones dislocated from their places, and to soothe the resulting pain, and to reduce swelling and Bruchure: take new lamb's wool, and moisten it in vinegar and oil, and apply it to the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This ointment does not cure, but it is good for soothing a hot abscess and removing pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of plaster that heals broken bones: take dry fig leaves and deadnettle leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster from it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of ointment to restore a broken bone and to reduce the remainder of an abscess: take equal parts of honey, wax, and oil, and cook them together.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take the root of marshmallow, camomile, violet flowers, and wheat flour, in equal parts; grind them and cook with wine. If the member is inflamed, cook with water or moist coriander water, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another more powerful method of ointment when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb: take equal parts of honey, wax, and oil, and cook them together. Then add one part each of root of marshmallow, camomile, violet flowers, and wheat flour; grind and cook with vinegar. If the member is inflamed, cook with water or moist coriander water, and apply it.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take the roots of viscovary, and flax seed, borage, melilot, and sanser, and flowers of violets and camomile, of each one part; bruise them, and cook with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hypocras says in his book that one should not put anything on the broken member to restore it other than a cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says that it should be between soft and too hard.Et dist qu’on doit prendre la cerote en la meine et la mettre sus le membre, et la faire adurer a la manie dou feu, si come l’huile chaude, et la mettre sus la brisure.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to Galen that one must put on the broken member, in order to restore, dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way of ointment that is good for injury and pain: take mugwort and human hair, or bird feathers, and beaver castoreum, and mix them together, and grind them up, and make an ointment out of it, and apply it to the affected area.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then loosen it a little after, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor that the bone moves from its place; if not, loosen it by hand for several days. And if pain comes to the spot, or itching, with rest or swelling, then hurry and loosen it, and remove the ointment immediately; and take light cloth, and sponge of sea moistened, and dip in water, and lift up the spot until the itching ceases and the pain is appeased; then let the member rest for an hour, then place on dry linen, moistened with water or rose oil, and bind it with a bandage, so that you are sure of hot abscess; and let the inflammation of the member subside, and the pain be removed, then begin the subtle binding again, and a little ointment, and do not tighten it as much as before; and subtly until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the hot abscess is red and painful and swollen all around, and you need ointment and binding, then restart it, just as you did at first.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if nothing comes to the member of what we have said, do not release it until after three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes he leaves it for twenty days, according to what one sees, until the fracture heals, and the adjustment of the flesh on top approaches; then restrain it more than before, and increase his food, as I have said before; and if you see the place drying out more than is necessary, know that nourishment cannot come there; therefore moisten it with warm water every time you release it, and do this every third day, and loosen the bandage a little; through this work, therefore, nourishment comes to the member, and it quickly heals what the foolish doctor does, who restores the member crookedly: this is bad, and such work is cowardly, and I see nothing in it but fatigue and doing it properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various breaking methods
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many types of fractures, with various shapes and distinct causes. Some fractures are caused by the impact of a sword, breaking the bone all the way to the joint located under the bone, similar to how a halberd or polearm would strike. This type of fracture is called a "halberd fracture".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword cuts into the bone without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound from these two fractures is large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a closed fracture, or a split, or from the collarbone, or from falling on stone, or from other similar causes.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a deep fracture that approaches the membrane below the bone, or it is on top of the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is placed in the bone as finely as a hair, and the split is small, then this type of fracture is called "capillary". And if the wound is caused by a stone, or by falling, or by a similar object, and it pushes the bone fragment inward, and the site is chapped like a blacksmith when they work on kettles; then the stone enters inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more often to those with soft bones in their heads, like children's skulls; and it happens with all types of fractures where small fragments are displaced, as I will explain later.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all types of fractures through examination, and through the corruption that is on them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The capillary appearance is known by the fact that when one has uncovered the bone and rubbed it with a finger, the fracture appears black.Si li os est fraiz et tuit contuz, et n’a nul semblant de brisure, ne conoissons pas s’il y a brisure si nous ne veons la sanguine qui s’en va ou s’en vient; car la sanguine qui s’en va, ne li dislocatiers ne se guarient si tost.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, be wary of signs of infection in the patient, and if you see any malicious accident, such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, swelling, fever, eyes bulging and reddening, and other similar signs in various dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.Et si li os est contuz et rompu, et li brisure n’est point noire ne sanguine ne s’en va; et les accidens dou malaide ne sont pas sus; et li os est en son leu, et la dislocation est guariee, si covient que tu esprouves li os se il est tuit en son leu; car il adonques n’y a nul semblant de brisure, si li os est contuz.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a dreadful accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the child comes to you for the first time, and it is in winter, then you must remove the tooth before the fourteenth day that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the spring, then you must hurry to remove the tooth before the seventh day, otherwise, the gum under the tooth will be corrupted and the accidents that we have described will occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone comes just to the membrane that covers the brain, then you should split the split part thus: and it is that you grasp the head of the wounded, and uncover on the bone in all the ways you can, and on the shape of the wound more gently than you can, and if bleeding occurs when uncovering the bone, or a hot abscess, use the help of what is appropriate, and it is that you fill the place with wet bandages in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the hot abscesses are soothed, and be sure of bleeding; then begin around the bone to remove, and it is done according to two ways of work: one way is that you cut closely in front, and this is the shape:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then cut another larger slit than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is to have various slits, some narrow and some wide, pointed, and made of iron; and work gently so you do not cut the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and protruding, you must pierce around it so that you can administer cauteries with tongs without breaking through the bone into the chest cavity; above the tip there should be a rim or a ring that prevents the tip from going beyond the bone. You should have several of these, so that each one goes in at the level of the thickness of the bone, and you will need tongs for all parts of the body. There are three types of tongs:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The technique for piercing around a broken bone is to place one tong on the bone and twist it with your fingers until you feel that the bone is pierced; then move the tong to another spot a little further along, and do this all around. Then cut away the bone between the piercings as precisely and gently as you can, as we have said, until you can pull the bone out by hand or with instruments such as pliers or tweezers; be careful not to touch the brain or the sinuses.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and cut the bone, then it is appropriate to resect the hardness that is left of the bone with any other instrument similar to a chisel, but it should be more blunt and more subtle than the other chisel; and if anything of the small bones or any scales remain, gently remove them with the instruments; then treat the wound with tenting and poultices as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of treatment is that which Galen speaks of, which is safer; he praises it highly, and it is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	First, you should expose a part of the bone where the fracture is open, so that when you have exposed that part, you will place under the head of this lens-shaped instrument, of which there is one made especially for this purpose:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, and the part is painful on both sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then tap gently with a small mallet, so that you slightly strike the bone all around, and be careful of the membrane which is underneath; if it is adherent to the bone, loosen it gently, for it can be loosened without harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is cut only slightly on top, and there are small pieces, then you should smooth that roughness, and remove the shards with a thin rasp, of which you should have various quantities, in order to apply in each place what is most appropriate, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Take the largest rasp first, then one that is more subtle, and do not cease to do so until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other subtle hair-like fractures and breaks, you should treat according to its nature; and this is something that has not been handed down to one who has devoted his studies to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the abscess is exposed, you should take a piece of linen according to the size of the wound and moisten it in rosemary oil, and place it over the wound; then take another piece of linen doubled into two or three layers, soak it in wine and rosemary oil, and place it over the first piece of linen; do this as gently as you can so that you do not put pressure on the abscess, then administer more medicine afterwards through another layer, without squeezing it harder than it covers the wound only; leave it like this for one or two days until the abscess is soothed, then remove it and apply healing medicines such as roots of lilies, and bran, and incense powder, and aristologist, and similar things; make a powder from these ingredients and apply it to the wound, and afterwards administer medicine without biting; and watch that the wound is clean, so you do not leave any ointment behind, nor allow pus to accumulate, for when pus accumulates on the membrane of the brain, it hardens and causes great harm to the patient; because when one applies something biting to the abscess, it softens from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, without a doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if blackness does not come about due to the medicine that has been applied, because of its power, one should take a portion of honey and three parts rose oil and glue it onto a piece of cloth, and apply it to the ulcer; then heal it in ways that are appropriate until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the jaw above are broken, either one or the other, for they are two bones; and below is cartilage, which does not break but only becomes dislocated or twisted, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then one should boil their little finger or a needle, and place it equally within the break in their index finger, and push out towards the palm, until the nail regrows according to its natural shape; and do this gently, and ensure that the patient does not feel pain through your action.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the upper jaw and the tooth cannot return to its place, then you should put it back into alignment with a thin tool.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is in two parts, then do the same, and try to reset it on the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has calmed down, then boil a tent of linen cloth at the tip of the finger if the break is on one side.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you can use a cautery of fire, if the break is there; and let the tent be so large that it fills the holes in the nails.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some restorers say that one must wet the tents with butter and change them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I do not think that is good, but one should wet them with egg white and flour; then leave the tent as long as the bone is open and the cartilage soft.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes they insert the quills of goose feathers in place of tents, and tie a silk cloth around it, and hold it in place, and the patient blows through it; do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if painful abscesses come to the nails while you are working there, then put a poultice of cotton moistened in rose oil, or in a pouch of diaquilon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a hard abscess comes, then put on a poultice of flour of groats and incense powder, cooked with egg white; then apply light linen and do not tie it too tightly; and if the fracture is small, and there are broken pieces, then extract them with suitable instruments, and clean the wound, and let it heal, and bind it with soft poultices and ointments suitable for this purpose; and if there is no wound inside the nose, then cure the tent with splints of plaster of Paris, until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	On dislocation of the jaw:
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is completely dislocated and there is no open wound, and the dislocation is only on the surface, and not broken in two where the corbels are inside, then it can be easily identified.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the dislocation is on the right side, you should put your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if it's on the left side of the jaw, use your right hand's index finger, and gently push the dislocation back into place with your other hand, and make it equal.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the dislocation of the jaw is to one side, you must administer an extension of two parts, so that it is equalized.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement in the teeth, or a dislocation, then he should be restrained with a gold or silver or silk thread, and then put cerate on the jaw, and put over it two layers of cloth; and put on top of the cloth a large well-made splint, or a piece of leather as long and wide as the jaw, and tie it tightly according to how he can bear it, and command the patient to rest and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, then loosen it on the third day, and then put back what has changed; and apply an ointment made of powder from the mill with plenty of egg or flour of sisament, after you have removed the cerote; and apply another light ointment on top, and if the ointments hurt, and the condition of the patient does not change, leave it until he is healed; many are healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if hot abscesses come, then administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, examine carefully to see if any piece of bone has been removed; then remove it skillfully using appropriate instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is tight, then loosen it with a flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and there remains nothing, then stitch the wound, if it is wide, and place upon it suitable poultices to promote healing, until it is cured.
de la forcele	of the scrotum
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The scrotum may rupture in several ways, towards the shoulder, and there are three types of rupture: one where it is ruptured and separated into two pieces, which is the least serious and can be easily repaired; another where there is a rupture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the procedure is, when there is no wound with the rupture, to have two assistants: one holds the scrotum where it is ruptured, and the other stretches the neck towards the affected area; then use your fingers to bring the edges of the rupture together so that the shape is correct, with no gaps or misalignment.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, place under the shoulder of the patient a round pillow made of cloth or wool, and make it thick according to your needs; then hold steady the arm and press the pillow in your hand so that you set the break evenly as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the arm out of its socket because it is deeply lodged, then the patient should lie on his back, and place under the shoulder a small pillow, and the assistant pushes the shoulder upwards while pulling the arm down so that the bone of the arm is dislocated.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then adjust the break with your fingers, and if you find it broken, then you should split it open; and gently pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot join due to any swelling, then cut into one of the incisions that you have made, but place this instrument under the arm to protect the skin:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	It should have the shape of a spoon, and not be too thick, and as wide as is appropriate according to the size of the bone and the nature of the work; and it has two prongs, as you can see, and one should be wide while the other is narrow, just like the shape of the wound that you made when treating the bones; and when you are certain of a hot abscess, cut through the skin, and if the route is small or you doubt the existence of a hot abscess, then pack the wound with bandages and tenting, according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses arise, moisten a bandage in rosemary oil and garlic and wine, and apply it to the affected area.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The dislocation of the bone, when there is no wound or fracture, is to place upon the bone the poultice made from mill dust and egg white, and put light sponges on top, and if necessary, place a splint underneath the joint; then take a very wide band of one palm in width, then place a double piece of cloth on top of the sponges and the poultice; then take a slender pole that is three digits in width and length, and wrap it around this band so that the end of the band hangs down; then place the pole across the fracture, and wrap the band around the neck, and underneath the healthy joint and the affected joint; and adjust it from each side, and when you see that the ligament holds the fracture in alignment, and you clearly see that the pole does not move across the broken bone, then re-examine it every day, and when the ligature becomes loose, tighten it; and have the patient lie on his back, and when he sleeps put a small pillow under the joint to raise the shoulder; thus the fracture will be relieved by the stretching of the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless a bad accident happens, until 20 days have passed; then restart the poultice if you see that it is needed, and adjust and leave it thus, until it is healed; and it is usually healed within 28 days, but some people recover sooner.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the shoulder fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	At times the shoulder is dislocated or widely displaced, and one feels it only on touch; then adjust the apparatus according to the pattern of the displacement, and reset it in its natural form, in every way you can; then place flour from the mill with egg white on the area, and apply light compresses, and place a double layer of cloth over that; then put a wide and thin board on top, slightly larger than the shoulder, and if there is a swelling underneath the shoulder, stuff that area with linen compresses so that the board sits evenly; then bind it firmly with a large bandage so that the board does not move from its place, and check the binding every day; and whenever it becomes slack, tighten it, and adjust the board if it has moved from its place, and let the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder will be restored within 20 or 25 days. And when this period is complete, release the bandage, and be assured that it is not a bone which can be put back into place easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone protrudes outward and not downward into the chest, make an incision and remove the bone, and do what we have said about healing a hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	about the fracture of the foot:
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The penis is sometimes broken in the middle, but this rarely happens; it often breaks at the tip.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it bends downward, and the patient feels great pain and a lack of sensation, and becomes limp, and sometimes vomits blood, and the fracture is visible in the broken bone, and he feels no pleasure.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is for the patient to lie on his back, and place a cushion between his shoulders, then press the shoulders, and bring the two sides of the ribs together with your hands, pushing gently to ensure they are even; then apply poultices and bandages made from salt or some other light material over the broken bone, and tie it in place so it does not move; then wrap the whole area in a cloth, and keep checking every hour, loosening the ligature if it becomes too tight, and changing the poultice regularly to treat any infections, pruritus, pain, or abscesses that may develop; once the bone is healed, remove the poultice and bandages, and address any scarring with appropriate remedies.
de la brisure des costes	about the breaking of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	You should know that rib fractures only occur in the upper back near the spine, and they do not bend unless they are slippery; and it feels good when pressed on both sides.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatment is to reset the break, making it even as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply the ointment and bind it with a bandage if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining inward, then the patient feels great pain and piercing, as with pleurisy, because the bone punctures the lung; and they have shortness of breath, and cough up, and vomit a great quantity of blood, and it is a serious illness, and the elderly have died from it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that one should administer foods that swell the belly, in order to push the fracture outward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make the fire, that hot embers won't come from it, if they didn't come from it.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some say that one should place cupping glasses over the area to draw out fluids, and this is reasonable; however, there is a risk that the cupping glasses will attract excess fluids due to the weakness of the body.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some say that one should cover the area with wet woolen cloth soaked in warm oil, and place tents between the ribs to ensure even pressure all around; then it should be treated with pleurisy-cures made from meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear due to the bone protruding through the skin, and there is doubt about the outcome, then one should cut above the site of the break and insert an instrument to push back the sac; then one should split the bone and gently pull it, and then sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat it with ointments until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if painful abscesses come, place moistened cloths in rose oil and apply them to the affected area; treat the site of the abscess as it requires, and let the patient lie carefully on his side where he should be, until he is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the break in the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes there is a fracture of the bones in the neck, and it doesn't bend; and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if he will recover or not, pay attention if you see his hands becoming soft, swollen, and numb, and he cannot move or straighten them, and when you prick him with a needle, he does not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that he is in a mortal condition in many ways, and if he becomes mute and feels nothing when the joints are pressed and pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the disease is cured, if proper treatment is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if similar conditions occur in the spine of the back, and you want to know if he will recover or not, pay attention if his feet become swollen, and if the symptoms are also present in his hands, and on his back there is a hunchback with wind and urination without will; and when he lies on his belly, there is wind without will.Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is leaned forward on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is deadly; therefore do not labor in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not happen to him, then the case is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if there is an abscess that is hot, then the doctor should put rosemary oil or hen's egg white on it until it is soothed; then he should apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bandage it, and instruct the patient to rest; and he should not sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is exposed, then it should be covered with a bandage; and the bone is removed, then the two lips of the wound are sewed together, if it is large, with a single stitch, and the doctor applies ointment and a plaster, if necessary; and he instructs the patient to keep it pressed, and if there is an exposed bone, they should press on it, remove it, treat the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the hip bone:
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Then the bones of the hip are broken, and if they are, then there is usually some lessening in the upper part; and it hurts a lot, and declines toward the perineum, and brings pain to the area, and punctures, and swells what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it, as far as you can reach the break; and know which is the break and its shape; and if the break is only in the upper part, then make that break even, so that it returns to its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long, or it declines inward, then let the patient lie on his stomach, so that the restoration of that break is prepared for him.Et s’il est dou lonc et decline au pardedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son dos, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it even, then put on the plaster, and then put on a board or splint, and bind the break so that it does not move; and apply the area under the ribs, so that the collarbone is made even.Et s’il avient que la brisure soit au chief soulement, si met le malaide sus son dos, et li estele soulement sus l’emplaustre, et li lieure desoz les costes, et li brisure adessous.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on their sound side or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if a boil erupts, do not touch it until the boil is suppurated, and apply what we have mentioned earlier; then return to restoration, and constrict as needed if there is no bad outcome; and that is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The adjutoires is what is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of the .ii. ways: one of which is that you take a plain stick of medium thickness, according to this form:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie two feet with two ropes, and they can be pulled up, and the patient is seated on a chair; then he lowers his broken arm onto the beam until it reaches the ground, and puts a curve in the beam, then pulls it down over some heavy object or the minister stretches it downward; then put the mirror at an angle equal to his hands together, so that the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is to suspend the patient from his harness, and tie his hand to his neck, then command two ministers, one to pull up what is above the break to his hands, and the other to pull down under the entire rope, and each pulls on their own side.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more difficult, then compress the vein below the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each of the ministers to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, then you should put the bandage in the middle under the shoulder, and the other towards the neck, below the fracture; and likewise if the fracture is towards the neck, then a light bandage should be put on gently, without labor, until the fracture is even in its place, and above the neck; then put the fracture in place as it should be, and compress it if no abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if a deep abscess comes, do not drain it until the 7th day, and place soft linen in ash and rose oil on the abscess, so that the deep abscess is relieved; then drain it, and the manner of draining it is to place the plaster on the fracture, then assemble the arm over the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and place a cloth, and drain it over the shoulder, and over the arm, so that the arm is in its place, if nothing moves it, or if the bone is not displaced.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone is moving, use splints and place a splint larger and stronger than the others over the fracture, and have 1 inch of space between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it extends 3 inches on either side of the fracture; then drain over the splints, just as I said at the beginning of the chapter over the fracture, more strongly and less by pulling.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the settling of the stars, and the constriction, as we have said, at the time that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the hot abscess, then let it be bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine the bandage every three days so that itching does not cause inflammation or swelling, or the growth of pus to come to the member because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	As we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents come, then remove the bandage after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach; and place underneath the shoulder a pillow filled with wool equally, and examine every hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken member does not move, or the bandage become soft; then he will recover through the power of medicine, and give him food as we have described before, so that the food is most subtle at first; and when he begins to regain his strength, then let the food be more substantial.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be wrapped for forty days all around; and then one must loosen it and administer a bath and ointment medications to direct the area.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stricture is bad and swollen, it remains that way for 50 days or two months.
de la brisure du bras	from the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is made up of two bones called the 'ulna', one of which is small and located near the armpit, and the other is large and located below the small bone towards the little finger; sometimes only the large ulna is fractured, or the small one, and sometimes both are broken.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, their restoration is easy, as is their healing; but when the large bones are broken, healing is difficult, and more painful than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small bone is broken, it should be extended slightly and put back in place.And then you must apply a splint and wrap it firmly with cloth.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large bone, it must be stretched more forcefully; and he should lie on his back, with his affected arm raised higher than the rest, and his small finger lower than the others, and he himself crossed over on his side, and the pillow under his head so that he suffers no strain; then extend the minister's arm above the part below his hand, or to the elbow, and another minister above him.And they should press down with their hands so that the bone ends meet.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then he sets the mirrors equal, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if there are broken pieces, place each one in its proper location; and if any stick out, grab the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as we have said before regarding the bone.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if there is a wound with the fracture, I have spoken of it in the individual chapter; then take the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of the restoration, abscesses appear, then apply a cerotte made of rose oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft; and gently lay the cerotte on top, until the abscesses are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the cerotte, and apply the plaster of miller's powder with egg white, then put on the bandages, and let the bandage over the fracture be a bit stronger, and slightly larger than the others; and understand that there must be six bandages on the arm in various positions: whether the fracture is in one bone or two; and apply more pressure over the fracture than elsewhere, lessening it gradually as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages over the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or rough; and let the thread used to tighten them be made of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And examine the limb and the joint after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching coming to the limb, you should wet the limb with warm water until the itch is relieved; and let the limb not be tightly bound but rather at rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then resume the stretching, and if the joints are loosened and the bones dislocated, and in similar ways, address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you take care so that the healing cannot come to the member because it is too tight, then you must loosen it a little, and let it be thus for several days, until the healing occurs, and then bind it again.Et se li maux sont de la guareine, si covient que tu le tiens estreit et que tu l’esprenges de vne uie chaude, et li pons  .i. drapeil de cerote, et li pons  .i. drapeil de la poudre dou molin, et puis li pons les esteles, si com nos avons dit davant; et laisse li maux venir au membre, et ne li esprenges mie; et se il vient au membre, si covient que tu l’esprenges, et li tiens le membre estreit.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have described happen to the patient, then do not loosen him for 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Or inquire around him, then let him hold his hands to his neck, and keep his neck even, and guard against movement and dislocation, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in 30 or 35 days, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexes of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the hand fracture
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that in the back of the hand and around the fingers there are few fractures, and they only come from many折ures.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, then the patient should lean forward, and then he should extend his hand and stretch out his fingers, and then the minister should reset any displaced bones and align them correctly; and if there are no abscesses, then they should apply a plaster and bandages according to the size of the injury, and then wrap it in a single piece of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is around the stomach of the plant, make a sphere out of cloth, and instruct the patient to grip it with their broken hand; then hold it with a long piece of cloth, and let the mark of the burn be as big as the palm of the hand, and hold it, as it should be.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is on the outside of the hand, you should place one splint above and another below the hand, so that the hand is open and straight; then bind it all around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture is in one of the fingers, such as the thumb, set it straight, as it should be; and hold it with the palm, and see if you can place a small straight splint to raise the fracture, and keep it from moving; and if the fracture is in any other finger, such as the index or another, set it straight as well, and bind the injured finger with the one next to it; or you can bind them all together while keeping them straight, or you can place a splint on top, as in the case of the thumb; and take care in the restoration and preparation of a hot abscess, and treat any pus that forms, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bones of the thigh are often broken and this can be seen when it is bent forward and backward; its restoration depends on binding with a bandage above the break and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And let the patient lie on his back, then extend each bandage to its respective part equally; and this is when the break is in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, then let one bandage be towards the buttock, and the other bandage beneath the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is near the knee, then let the bandage be beyond the knee, and the extension below; then put the splint, making the bone equal to its natural shape with his two hands, and then apply the ointment, and the ligature, unless abscesses form there.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it calm down first and then return to your work and treatment; the time frame is as follows.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	You should wrap around the fracture a thick bandage doubled in two or three layers, and leave off the excess, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the thigh, and wind the long thread between the thigh and the leg beyond the knee below, and let the ends of the thread come above; then turn up the bandage over the leg and the thigh, then put splints on the fracture, and place a splint on the bone of the leg; then tighten the space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to adjust the tightness, then begin binding tightly in three or four places over the fracture; and as you go higher above the fracture, loosen the tightness; then tighten the two ends of the thread which you have wound between the thigh and the leg, and tie three splints that are on top, then return below to the end of the thread, so that you come under the foot; and tighten it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that no abscess or swelling or similar thing comes.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if something happens, remove it and treat what happened as we have said many times before; and if there are pieces of bone protruding, they should be removed if possible; and if not, the area should be split open and cleaned out; and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.Et s’il i a aposteme ou enfleure, si le deslie et adrecce la briseure, si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thigh is broken as if by stars, as in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, such restoration does not help the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And you should know that the thigh is restored in one day, or a little less or more, according to the different complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the groove of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the knee joint there is little breakage, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is only a split, or a perforation, and it happens with any wound, and without a wound, and everyone feels it.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that one puts equal to what is torn in his hands, as long as they can be assembled; then put the plaster, and if necessary, place a round splint, and tighten it as needed; then observe all the instructions we have given for other fractures, such as hot abscess and similar conditions; and apply to each occurrence what is appropriate, until he is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the leg fracture
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called by its proper name 'mustelz', and the other is called 'foscile'; and all injuries occur as they do in the arm, and therefore the restoration is the same, and the works are all the same. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns upside down everywhere.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bones are broken, return above.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it is seen clearly; and it turns underneath.Et li auter os ne sent on non dolor, nes le voit on pas, nes on ne le sens pas.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Therefore, apply extension, and make it equal, and tie the splints equally; but nevertheless, if the fracture is ugly, and there are several pieces, then the extension should be less and lighter; and adjust it according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have finished your work, take two wooden splints which support the leg on both sides from the knee down to below it; then wind two bandages around them above and below, and tie it in the middle, and at this time the leg should not be able to bend to the right or left, and thus it is well; and some use a board as long as the leg, and they put the leg on it to guard against movement, and properly they make that which is in the break where there is pain; and move the leg every day to see if there is any hot abscess or other accident; then treat it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the break of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but sometimes a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot and toes, and nothing more than a sprain in various locations.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a fracture in the bones of the foot, and you see the bones rising above one another, then place the patient's foot on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, and then put your foot on top of his, at the point where the bones are raised; then press it so hard that they return to their proper position. Then apply the ointment and bandages, and underneath the sole of the foot, place a small wooden board with two flat sides, then tighten it securely around the foot, and wrap cloth and other materials around it as needed.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And after three or four days have passed, loosen the binding, for you will find that the bones are healed, whether they were fractured or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there is any broken bone in the foot, treat it as we have described for the fingers of the hand; then place a splint according to the length of the toe, and let it be slightly larger; then place underneath the foot that wooden board which I mentioned earlier, and tighten it securely; and if there are two or three, or more, broken bones, place on top of each toe a splint according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and tighten the board underneath the foot; and let the top of the board press firmly against the sole of the foot.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures; and treat each case as it arises.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone in the wrist
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bones of a woman's nature are broken, make her sit with her hips spread apart, then tilt her forward from the back, and have her held from behind; then fill the vagina with cotton wool, and place a stone as big as an egg inside; then make the woman stand up and gently bend her back, and then the cotton will come out along with the stone as it enters the nature, taking the bones with it; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished, put it back in, and do this for seven days; the fracture will be restored. Then take a sheep's bladder, tie a tube to the opening, and fill the bladder with air by blowing into the tube until it is inflated inside; the nature will return the bones to their place; then fill it with cotton wool and leave it like that for some days until it heals.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the man's finger is broken, or that of a woman, restore it as we have said for the bone of the hip; and these breaks are not hidden from him who devotes himself to its study and practice, and understands my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the break reveals in many ways the right path to restoration; understand this therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	When a penis is broken, take a goose's throat and insert it into the penis; then wrap it tightly with cloth, leave it for three days or until it heals, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	from breakage with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as in the thigh or shoulder or similar, to be treated immediately, and the treatments that we have described bear witness to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, and there is no sign of infection, then you should restart the treatment for the break in the same hour or that day, if no abscesses appear.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if painful abscesses arise, let the healing wait until the next day, so that the abscesses are soothed, and do not touch them on the third or fourth day, for you would bring about an evil event.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is apparent on the exposed chest, you should gently put it in place with your hands, with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not apparent to you for putting it in place with your hands, then use this instrument made of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and the width depends on the amount of the wound; and it requires the surgeon to grasp it three or four times, depending on each case of broken bone; and it should be round and a bit thick so that it does not bend under pressure on the limb during your work, and thin at the front, and thick from the middle towards the front, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called 'dislocation', because the curved head of the bone should be placed upon the apparent end of the bone; and it is reset once, so that it may return and be even with the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle and the instrument cannot grasp the bone well, then you must chip away at the head of the bone so that the instrument can get a hold of it.Et si li os est grand et fort, et li estrumens ne puet bien le retenir, si covient que tu le prennes de deux maneres.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, then cut into it with an appropriate tool, or a scalpel or saw, to your ability; then remove that which is lodged in the bone, with roughness and small scrapings.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	Do this until it is in its place, then soak the cloth in red wine, and wring it out properly if it has been soiled; do not put any ointment or other substance on the wound that might cause pus and corruption; then apply leeches once you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, wrapping the bandage around according to the size of the wound, taking care that the wound is not constricted by the bandage. Many foolish people have done this, causing death or corrosion on the patient, at times; and the constriction should be gentler than with other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is large and you doubt that a bad accident might occur, as we have said, and you feel pain in the area, then do not apply leeches to it; but wrap around it hard cloths, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days inflammation swelling on the wound, then remove what you put on it before, and apply ointment that heals wounds, such as tetrafarmacon and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you should loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is healed and mended.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary for the limb to be positioned in such a way that the bowstring runs smoothly downward.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they persist for many days, and it cannot be souded but keeps dislocating the bowstring, know that there are small pieces of bone causing this, so you should probe the wound with a tent, and remove all these dislocated pieces which cause the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the surface, or another form of corruption, then you should treat it according to what he said in his chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, as in the thigh or shoulder bone, and similar large bones, do not treat it at all, for many die from it, but let it be until it heal over; perhaps it will fall out after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can, and if you cannot, leave it alone.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of the bruises that come over the soudure
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	After the fracture, many things come to the surface, especially when it is near the joint; and it is an ugly sight to see the shape of the limb; and perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	So take care that the pus is brought to the surface: so the minister to him astringent medicines, such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others; or you grind some of these things, or all together, and confit them with wine astringent, or with vinegar of eggs, or with garlic; and put it on the wound at night in poultices, and tie it well, and do not loosen it for several days; and then loosen it, and start another one, until the knot is removed; or you apply it to a piece of plaster well made; for the property of plaster is that it removes all swellings from the limbs; and if the knot has turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, scrape it off, and bring the superfluity to the surface; or you have it removed by someone skilled in shaving, so that it is removed, and the wound is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb that is weak after the healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is healed, and the limb remains weak and thin, this happens for many reasons: one reason is that it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and the nourishment could not reach the limb; or because of profuse bleeding; or because of excessive movement, and not at the right time; or because there is little blood in his body, and it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body tender, so that the blood multiplies in him; and the minister gives him a bath, and gives him joy and relaxation; then put pitch on the limb, so that the pitch attracts a great deal of heat, and often washes it with tepid water, so that the heat runs into the limb; and returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	then the limb becomes straight after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after healing, and the broken bone is open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish who say that one must break the limb again completely, and many fools have done this in our land; and these actions are blamed, and great harm, and even death can come from them; nevertheless, if the dislocations and tortures are fresh, then they should be washed with hot water, or soft herbs are cooked, such as leaves of mullein, and roots, and marsh-mallow, and similar medicines that soften; and you make an emollient, such as a well-made diaquilon, and you take the mucilage of mullein, and infuse it with tallow or sisam oil, and apply it as an ointment; or you take fat figs, and grind them with colon-fibre, and similar medicines.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the joint is dislocated by continually rubbing with wet hands for a long time.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And motion must be applied to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosities are awake and hardened, like stone, and it is necessary to remove them with iron, then one must cut them down to the bone, with a subtle and light incision; and put cotton and study into the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs in someone, one must immediately reset it without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the place swells and if one tries to reset it in its place; therefore one must not move it at the hour that it is swollen: many times it brings swelling and other pains; nevertheless, when this happens, let the patient be bled, then let him rest until the abscesses are healed; then warm the member with hot water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each member as the healing comes to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocation from the head to the feet.
des mandibules	of the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Then the jaws become dislocated and both dislocations occur in two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their place and softened a little, or they are completely dislocated and hang down towards the feet, and saliva flows from the mouth which he cannot hold back, nor can he close his mouth or wrap his tongue around words.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it can be corrected with various manipulations.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is complete and accomplished, then you must reset it quickly and not hesitate; and in such a way that the minister grabs the head of the patient, and blocks the mouth with his pocket from one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw, if the dislocation is in two parts; and let the other hand be loose, to apply pressure evenly; and instruct the patient to soften his jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the midwife keeps an eye on it until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is stuck, especially if both jaws are together, then use hot water and oil, gently massaging until they loosen; do not try to force them open, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back into alignment and the mouth of the patient is closed tightly without softening, then place moistened dressings made of rose oil and wax on it, and then bind it gently with soft bonds; and let the patient sleep on his back, and let his head be propped up between two cushions so that he does not move it to the right or left, nor does he exert himself to yawn, but takes in only small amounts of food until the pain is gone and the jaw is healed; and then let him eat what he wants easily, and do not make him open his mouth to eat and drink until the jaw is well healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be reset in an hour and are not converted to their place, then fever and usual sickness come, and perhaps stomach upset, and perhaps vomiting clear fluid.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a bad omen; and many die from it within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The shoulder cannot be dislocated from the ribcage within its continuance, and it is sometimes dislocated by force, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies down on his back and extends his arms; then press the dislocated area firmly with your palm, and it will return to place; then apply the plaster and bandage, and tie it tightly; and the shoulder joint, which is near the neck, cannot be dislocated; if it does dislocate, and if it returns to place once, then you must put it back in its place, as we have said; then apply the plaster and bandage, and tie it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed; and thus is the shoulder joint put back in its place when it has been dislocated.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: one is when it dislocates at the bottom part near the armpit; the second is at the foot part; and sometimes it dislocates at the top part, and this happens rarely; it does not dislocate at the back of the shoulder, nor inside for the nerves; and often it dislocates beneath toward the armpit, especially in those who are thin, but in those who are sturdy, it dislocates with a push, and goes back in with a push.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to some men that they have a concussion or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of that.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Then you must test it until you are certain of it, and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And you will know it is dislocated when it is down toward the armpit, and there is a marked difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one; and you will find a visible difference between them; and you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and beneath the armpit the top of the shoulder, just as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move in any way; and likewise, if it is dislocated upward, it is not hidden, for you will see it clearly at the touch; and this type of dislocation is not difficult to fix when it is new, or if the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is for the assistant to lift the ill hand upward, then place your fingers under the shoulder joint and lift the joint forcefully upwards into place; while the assistant lifts the hand and extends it upward, then lowers it; this will bring quick relief.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and administered softening and soothing ointments, such as decoctions of hellebore, fenugreek, and sweet-robin in water, and be rubbed down; then the patient should lie on their back, and under the affected shoulder a layer of woolen cloth, neither too soft nor too hard, then the minister places their heel on the cloth, and gently lifts the top of the shoulder, and pulls the hand of the affected arm; while another minister holds the head of the affected side so it does not move downward; in this way the shoulder will return immediately, and if you see that it is not returning, do it according to this method: and have a man present who is larger than the patient; and stand straight toward the affected side, and press the healthy shoulder under the affected one, and lift up the cloth so that the patient hangs in the air; and another minister pulls the hand of the affected arm downward toward the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	If the patient is too light, they can be weighed down with something heavy, and the dislocation will return immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And it is reset in another way: a long stick is thrust into the ground, so that the shoulder joint is as warm as a pistol, neither too hot nor too cool; then the patient is placed on top of it, but with a soft cloth underneath, and the patient should be upright; then his hand is extended down on the other side, and the joint will return to its place immediately; and if it does not return by all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a stick two arms long and four fingers wide, which has a rounded head to easily enter under the shoulder, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then tie it to the top of the shoulder with soft cloth so that the shoulder does not hurt the patient, then place it under the dislocation; and extend his arm along the length of the stick, and tie the shoulder to the stick, and the arm at the hand, then place the arm on .i. plank that is broad, and extend the hand downward, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, however it may be, you should then place a woolen sphere underneath the dislocation, then apply the prepared plaster of mill-powder, with incense and egg white, over the entire shoulder and around it; then tighten it under the dislocation gradually, and tie the bandage over the plaster, and hug his hand to his neck, and let his hand remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he eats little, as long as the member is comfortable, because he will heal faster; and then eat more after five or seven days, and move it; and if it is stiff and not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has come out of place because of moisture that it received, or for another reason, then you must administer cauteries to three holes, as it is described in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift his arm upstream, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fitted into its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocations that are towards the bottom, and in the breasts, or behind, are made by pushing and stretching with the hands, and one administers it elsewhere; and treat it until it is healed.Li dislocation qui sunt devers lou costé, ou en l’espaule, et li mameles, si est par impulsion et estendement, et on li met le membre sur son leu, et il se tient; et si ne se tient, adonc covient que tu remets li membre en son leu.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing, there is stiffness in the limb, and with time and movement, the patient uses the bath many times until the stiffness is alleviated and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of dislocation from the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You should know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated by the fingers, and it returns with the fingers; and if it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not reduced, for one can see and feel it well, and it dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sickly neck with the healthy one, you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is crooked, and he cannot bend his arm or touch his shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must reset it as soon as abscesses form there, for if abscesses form there, then resetting it will be painful; and by chance it may not be able to be fully reset, especially when it is in the back; so it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and by chance death can come.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it can be reset, that you stretch out his hand with your two hands; and let his arms be spread out, and his hands bent according to the elbow, from the inside and outside, and push the joint on his wrists together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in the front, then it will return when he bends his hand to his hand and pushes from the root of the palm the elbow which has become dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if he does not want to return to the place, then strong extension is administered; and while two ministers extend the arm, a third minister bends it, so that it does not move at the extension; then the arm is turned from each side, after which you have wrapped a long and wide cloth around it; and when they have joined the joint with their hand, they smear some oil on it to soften the joint, then they push the joint firmly back into place, until it returns; and when it is in place, they apply a dry plaster with egg white, and stretch it firmly, and then let the arm hang from the neck of the sickly one, and leave it for several days, after which they loosen it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, loosen the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not healing well, restart the poultice and the bandage, and leave it for several days, until it is firmly in place; then loosen it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels soreness after the joint is moved, and it moves, then bath and rub it well, and press until it is soothed; or you put a fat sheep's tongue on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and make him enter the bath; and when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the tongue back on, and then enter the bath again; do this two or three times until he is healed; and if you see fit, put warm cow dung on it with butter, and press it on; it will return to its proper state.
li dislocation de la main	dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand is a light injury compared to other joints; nonetheless, it must be put back into place immediately, in the same hour that it was dislocated, especially if the joint is swollen or a hot abscess has formed.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And for the movements, you place the patient's hand on a table, and extend his hand, and look at it to ensure it is straightened, then he places his palm on the appearance of the joint, and bends it until it returns to its normal state; you should also check that it is in its proper position; next, have the patient place the back of his hand on a table while you extend and move it.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, let the patient put the back of his hand on the table, and the surgeon put his hand over that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it pops back into place now, that is good. If not, then strain it with soothing poultices for abscesses, and let him stay like that without re-dislocating.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back into place after several days, then let the joint remain crooked; and do not harm the patient in any way as long as the hand is numbed, and do not try to pull anything out: then know that either the nerves or arteries are cut; there is no other remedy but to strain with cautery near the case, and by chance nothing else works.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, then put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then he pulls and leaves it for .v. days, then he loosen and leaves it like that.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is any swelling, then moisten it with warm water, and rub it until it heals.Et s’il est desaloie par cause de l’estrainage, si le met a leu et le frotte et remue ains qu’il soit en son leu, puis il met l’emplaustre sus li chiés, et li remedeit.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the handAnd s'il est desaloie par cause de l'estrainage, si le met a leu et le frotte et remue ains qu'il soit en son leu, puis il met l'emplaustre sus li dois, et li remedeit.
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes it is dislocated on one side of the hand, sometimes on the back of the palm or on the belly; then let the fingers be bent towards the part where it is dislocated; and hold the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated; and leave it for two days, and then put it back in place that day; and do not bind it as we have said, but loosen it at night, and move it during the day, and repeat this often until it is healed; and do likewise if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, and do as you did before until it is healed; and do likewise if it is dislocated in another place.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	dislocation of the spine from the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine or neck is dislocated, there is no treatment, for death comes quickly with this injury.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the evacuations occur without voluntary effort, and he cannot hold them in, and many times a limb becomes paralyzed, either the two hips or the two arms or one; and often the skin changes color in four places; when it happens in the back, it is called "gilbositez": the cure is to find out if the gilbositez began in childhood: if not, there is no cure or healing from it.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient books on medicine describe in great detail, but I have abbreviated it according to my understanding, and have devised instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the gilbositez that comes on the front foot, there is no healing; and also that which comes directly on both sides, and cannot be cured except by the one that comes straight on the back, as I said; and it must be that the patient stretches his face in one place equally, and has a bandage underneath him so that he does not slip; then insert a brand at the head into the ground, and another at the feet, and tie a string underneath the sores of the patient, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles; and two ministers hold the strings, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the brands; and they are tied well, the brand as we have said, and the minister puts his palms on the spine, until it is restored.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return through this treatment, take a board three feet long, and dig under the wall, and let the patient be on their side, and insert the end of the board under the wall, then place the middle of the board on the spine; and have the patient put their feet on the other end of the board, and press hard, until it returns to its place; and if you see fit, do this while turning the body towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And you should drive two spikes into the patient's head at a distance of one cubit from the feet, and two more near the feet, with a palm's width between each spike on top and bottom; and let there be an opening in each spike for the rope to pass through, and secure the spikes firmly in the ground so they do not move; and between each pair of spikes, have a turning spike, over which the ropes will turn, and have two small spikes at each turning point, a palm's width long, to guide the turn; and then tie the cord that is between the nails to the turning point towards the head, and the other cord to the other turning point towards the feet, and everyone in the group turns their turn on all the cords, and the master straightens the spine as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, then put on a desiccant poultice with egg white, and then the towels, and then the splint of a board three fingers long, which covers the area of swelling and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a bandage, as we have said, and use the subtle numbing medicine until it is healed; and if nothing comes in the end but health, then one must administer softening and soothing medicines, with the splint that we have mentioned earlier; and sometimes one administers a piece of plaster, and sometimes the appearance comes on the back of the spine, and one thinks it is dislocation; and it is the bone that is protruding, and one must not have any presumption about it: for perhaps it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder do not become dislocated except as dislocations; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and most inside, and less dislocated in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation within is such that when one joins the affected leg with the healthy one, it is longer and the affected knee appears more than the healthy one, and the affected one cannot bend its knee towards the fire; and the part which is next to it is swollen with a hot abscess due to the shoulder joint of the thigh coming close to it.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes as a defense, is that this event is contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him who experiences it in front are that his leg is well according to its length; nevertheless, he does not bend the knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot, and he retains his urine, and the groin swells, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who experiences it behind are that he cannot bend or straighten his knee, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The remedies for this kind of dislocation are that you examine whether the dislocation is recent, and it remains according to its condition, then there is no cure; and he must not presume.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for the one whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of the four kinds of dislocation, you hurry to return the joint, and hold it in place and stretch it out, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will return, and it does not need another cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	If it does not return in this way, then you must prepare the assistant strongly, and extend the leg with both hands, or with one hand tied to the knee; and another assistant extends his hand above so that he presses his hands under his heels, then tighten a cord around the thigh; and another ties the head of the patient; and they all stretch upward and downward at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground once and remains pendant.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to the four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, then you must apply pressure in his likeness When the dislocation is on the hip, you must help the patient onto their healthy side, then place the cord around the root of the thigh, and around the location under the groin; then tighten the cord above towards the groin, and towards the armpit; then another assistant grabs his arms, and hugs the large part of the dislocated thigh, and stretches it forcefully: it will return to its place now; and this type of dislocation is less serious than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot bind it in the manner we have said, then you must tie both feet of the patient together with a strong leather strap around the heels and knees; let the leg of the patient be extended two fingers more than the other; then let him be hung by the head from a pole, and let his arms hang down two cubits long; then command the attendant to grab the top of the thigh, and another attendant to hold the patient's leg tightly, for the joint will return quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is reduced, let the patient lie down as we have said in the one who has gout; then tighten the strap on the leg and the foot; then put two brands, one at the head and one at the feet, then insert the brand between the thighs of the patient with the hand in the form; then wrap moist bandages around it so that it does not scorch the patient; then extend each attendant towards him, and let the surgeon put pressure on the dislocation with his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it comes back, that's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place him on a table and press him as we have said in the dislocation of the elbow, and lay the patient on his healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, one should stretch out the affected leg gently, and according to what I have said; and the helper puts his weight on the painful shoulder, then presses with the other hand, and pulls downward towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is external, one must not extend the patient downward or lift him up from the ground, but he should be as if his hip were dislocated outward, as we have said about lying on both hips; and he should lie on his face, with the bandage stretched as we have said before, and someone should press upon the joint on the table; and when the patient extends his legs and they are even, then adjust the thighs and apply the plaster, and strain it with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and he should rest for 3 or 4 days, then release him, and apply the plaster again; and if you see that they are even, then strain as before, and let him rest for 3 days; then release him and make him walk well until the limb is healed.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of dislocation of the knee:
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	There are three ways that the knee can be dislocated: that is, inside, outside, and behind; it cannot be dislocated in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the sign is that you command the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not bend at the thigh, you know that he is dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his face, and put his foot on your feet; then take his knee in your palms, and pull between your fingers, then bend both sides of the knee smoothly; and another minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he bends his leg at the thigh easily; and put the plaster on, and make the leg warm at the thigh, and let them be glued together for three or four days, then loosen it; and the patient should not work at all, until the limb is healed.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not at all, then administer a strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	Heels are sometimes dislocated, and sometimes completely dislocated, both internally and externally.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and they feel pain in the part where it is dislocated; the movements should be gentle, and one must gently stretch out their hands when it is only dislocated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is healed from everything, then you should make the patient stand straight, and you grip his leg above the ankle; then pull the foot towards you with your right hand and then with your left hand, twice, then stretch it upwards, and pull up the foot firmly; and do this twice, as we have said, by bending and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, then recommence the operation, for it will return; and if it cannot return thus, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and fix the strap firmly in the ground between his buttocks, and wind cloth around it so that he does not kick with his feet; then one gripper grips his thigh, and another gripper stretches out the foot to his hands or to the leg, so that he pulls it up against the collar of the foot; then stretch each gripper equally, and let the strap be between the patient's buttocks to hold him when he is stretched; then put the grippers equally on his hands, and another gripper grabs the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is healed, then put the plaster and bandages on top, and tighten it firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, and be careful of the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the ligature is not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligature loosens, then tighten it; then untie it after a third or a quarter day, and they should walk within four days; and if they walk before this time, there is no guarantee that they will not relapse.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a hot abscess comes, you must calm it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	of the arms
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the arms are dislocated, they should be gently extended without force, and that is a minor matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any part of the foot, then you should make the patient sit on a flat surface or table upright, and put your foot over what is open in the joints, and then press firmly on the foot until it pops back into place; and when it is even, and there is nothing opening, then put a two-legged board under the sole of the foot, then tighten it firmly, and leave it for three days, then untie it; and let the patient rest until they are healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When injury occurs with dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, many times the patient dies: so do not be presumptuous in the treatment if you are not wise in the art or have not used it for a long time; and if you are not compassionate, merciful, and cautious, do not be rash. And at the beginning use warm abscess-soothing things, and leave the patient in God's hand if you do not see hope of recovery; but when you see hope, then immediately reset the limb so that the warm abscesses may heal; and once the limb is back in place, administer warm abscess-soothing things and treat the wound as it should be treated with drying ointments; and if there is a fracture with dislocation, and broken bones, set the bones and do what we have said for simple injuries. And beware of venturing into fear, according to what I have said, for it will harm you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arms and body.
Amen	So be it.
