Having completed for you, O Sons, this book, which is the last of medical science with its complement, and having reached the end thereof from its expositions and declarations, it seemed to me that I should complete it for you with this Treatise which is a part of operation, that is surgery with the hand.
Since operation with the hand is prostrated in our region and time utterly private, so that perhaps the knowledge of it has perished, and its trace cut off; and there remain from it no descriptions except small ones in the books of the ancients, which hands have changed: and error and hesitation have happened to them until its intentions were closed and its force elongated. It seemed to me that I should revive it with the arrangement of this Treatise therein according to the way of exposition, declaration and abbreviation; and that I should come with forms of instruments of the Cautery and the other working instruments, with what is done from the addition of declarations and from its hastening which is necessary.
But the cause for which a good craftsman of it with his hand is not found in our time is because the art of medicine is long, and the author thereof must exercise himself before that in the knowledge of anatomy as Galen narrated until he knows the joints of the members and their forms, and their conjunction and separation, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews and their number and their egress, and arteries pulsatile and quiet, and places of their exit.
And on account of that, Hippocrates said that a name with a name is much, and with work it is little, and especially in the art of the hand.
We indeed have already spoken of him at the beginning of this book.
For he who is not knowing what we said of anatomy is not purged, but rather falls into error by which men are killed: just as I have seen many of those who are formed in this knowledge and boast themselves thereof without knowledge and without experiment.
For this reason happened to me to see a stupid doctor cut open a scrofulous abscess on the neck of a woman and he cut into some arteries in her neck, so that blood flowed from the woman until she fell dead between his hands.
And I saw another doctor who presumed to extract a stone from a man who was advanced in age, and the stone was large. He therefore came upon him and extracted it along with a piece of the bladder. Therefore the man died on the third day.
And I myself had already been summoned to extract it and I saw from the size of the stone and the condition of the sick man that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who was receiving a fee from a certain Duke in our land for medicine: and it happened that a black eunuch who was with him suffered a fracture in his leg near the heel: and the doctor hastily, with his ignorance, bound the fracture over the wound with bandages and strong binding straps and did not allow the wound to breathe.
Then he discharged him according to his wishes. Afterwards he dismissed him after several days and ordered him not to loosen the bandage: and it remained so until his leg and foot became abscessed and he came to ruin.
I was therefore summoned to him and I hurried to loosen the bandage and there was relief and he escaped from his pains.
Nevertheless the corruption had already been confirmed in the limb and I could not restrain it.
Put therefore the corruption ceased to spread in the limb until it died.
And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous abscess and it became ulcerated afterwards until the malice of it was magnified with its master.
For this reason: when cancer is pure from melancholic humor then it is not necessary to approach it with iron at all unless it is in a limb which can tolerate it so that the whole of it may be cut off.
And for that reason O sons, it is necessary for you to know that operation with the hand is divided into two divisions: namely, operation which is associated with health; and operation with which there is danger in many dispositions.
And I have already aroused in every place of this book, in which comes operation, in which there is terror and fear.
Therefore it is necessary for you to be cautious of that and moderate it so that fools do not find a way to speak and dishonor.
Therefore receive the measure with solicitude and protection, and your infirm ones with ease and firmness, and use the better way leading by God's grace to salvation and praiseworthy succession; and dismiss terrible illnesses of difficult healing; and lift your souls from that which makes you fear so that hesitation may enter upon you in your faith and well-being.
For it is more lasting for your glory and more sublime in this world, and finally for your quantities.
For Galen already said in some of his admonitions. Do not treat a bad illness lest you be called a bad doctor.
Now however I have divided this Treatise according to three Chapters.
Chapter One.
On Cautery with fire, and Cautery with sharp medicine, chaptered and ordered from head to foot, and the forms of cautery instruments and tools; and all that is necessary in the operation.
Chapter Two.
On incision and perforation, phlebotomy and venesection, and wounds: and the extraction of arrows and similar things; and wholly chaptered and ordered according to the forms of instruments.
Chapter Three.
On restoration and dislocation and the cure of torsion and similar things; chaptered and ordered from head to foot, and according to the forms of instruments.
But before I recall the operations performed with it, it is necessary to say what are the qualities of its cauterizations and their harms; and in what constitution they manifest.
I say, therefore, that speech concerning the quality of cautery's cauterization and its harm is a long and subtle science and hidden secret.
Indeed, many wise men have spoken on this subject, and they have disagreed; and it is sufficient for me to say a little from their words, fearing prolixity.
I say, therefore, that cautery generally suits every constitution which is with matter and without matter; except for two constitutions, which are a hot constitution without matter, and a dry constitution without matter.
However, in the hot and dry constitution with matter they disagreed. For some said that cautery is beneficial in it. And others said the opposite of that, namely, that cautery is not suitable in a disease which is from heat and dryness; because the nature of fire is heat; and it is inconvenient for something hot and dry to heal a disease which is hot and dry.
And he who said the opposite of that said: that through cautery benefit is done in every hot and dry disease which occurs in the bodies of men; because when you compare the body of a man and its humors to the complexion of fire, you find the body of a man cold.
And I indeed say through his speech: because experience has already revealed that to me many times.
However, it is not fitting that he should come upon this unless he has already been proven and trained in the last chapter of the practice of cautery, and has learned the diversity of human temperaments, and the disposition of diseases within themselves, and their causes, and their incidents, and the time period of them.
But there is no fear over you from the remaining complexions; and especially in cold and moist illnesses. For all physicians have now agreed on them, and they have not disagreed on the benefit of cautery in them.
And know, sons, that from the secret of healing by cautery with fire, and its goodness over cautery with a burning medicine, is because fire is simple, whose action does not reach except to the limb which you are cauterizing, and it does not harm another limb joined with it, except for a small injury.
But the action of burning medicine reaches that which extends from the limbs, and perhaps causes a difficulty in healing to occur in the limb, and perhaps destroys it.
But fire, because of its subtlety and goodness of its substance, does not do that unless it overflows.
Now indeed it has become clear to us through experiment, because of the length of service and study with art, and steadfastness upon the truth of things, and because of that I excuse myself from the length of speech.
And if it were not so, because it is not permitted for this book of mine, I would bring to you the hidden secret in fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies through its expulsion, by which it expels illnesses with demonstrative philosophical speech, which would agree with your minds.
And know, sons, that they themselves disagree on the time in which it is fitting for cautery to be done, and they posit a better time according to truth.
And I say that cautery is fitting at all times; therefore the harm which occurs because of time is submerged in the benefit, which is attracted with cautery. And especially if the cautery is for pains from necessary pains, strong, prompt, which do not tolerate delay: because it is feared that from them, a harm may happen, which is greater than a small injury incurred through time.
And let it not fall into your minds, O sons, that which the common and foolish physicians do not fear, namely that to the sickness which is healed by cautery, there is not always a return; and they posit that as a consequent, and the thing is not as they think: because cautery is nothing but a medicine in its place, which alters the complexion and dries up the humors which are the causes why pains happen.
Truly however cautery surpasses medicine through the swiftness of its health and the power of its operation and the vehemence of its dominion: and it is possible that sickness may return at some hour according to the complexion of the weak person, and the location of his sickness, and its power; and what is prepared in his body from an aggregation of superfluities therein; and what comes upon him in acquisition from foods and similar things from those causes unless sickness arises in which cautery is administered.
Sickness subtle in a limb of few superfluities and humors, such as cautery of a tooth, because of pain and similar things to it, for it is possible that the pain may not return in it. But that happens in few cases.
But truly the common saying again, that cautery is the last of medicine, is a right statement: not to that which they intend in it; because they believe that there is no cure which agrees with medicine nor with any other after the setting of the cautery.
The matter is however contrary to that and the intention, that cautery is the last of medicine, is not except when we administer modes of cures in some sicknesses, and those medicines do not agree: then we administer cautery at the end of the matter, and it agrees; then from there it falls, that cautery is the last of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and many foolish physicians understand.
The ancients said that a cautery with gold is better than a cautery with iron, and they did not say this except because of the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance; and they said that it does not make pus the place of the cautery. But that is not absolutely true: for I have now proved it and found that it does not do so in some bodies without others.
And a cautery with it is good and better than with iron, as they said. However, when you ignite a cautery in fire made of gold, it is not declared to you when it is ignited according to the quantity which you wish, because of the redness of the gold; and when cold rushes towards it, and if you add ignition upon it, it melts in the fire and turns into sheets.
Therefore the craftsman falls from it into occupation; and because of that a cautery with iron is made among us faster and closer, from straightness to the operation.
And I myself have now arranged this chapter on the cautery according to chapters; and I have arranged them from the head down to the feet so that it may relieve one seeking that which he wants from it.
Chapter II.
Cauterization here is directed at the dominion of humidity and coldness over the brain; which are two causes of headache, and abundance of flow of humors from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and abundance of sleep, and toothache, and sore throat: and universally every sickness which happens from coldness, such as paralysis, and headache, epilepsy, and apoplexy, and those similar to these sicknesses.
The way of cauterization is that you order the sick person to be evacuated first with a medicinal solution purging the head for three nights or four, according to what the strength of the sick person requires, and his age and his habit.
Then order him to shave his head with a razor. Then make him sit between your hands on a stool, so that he has already placed his hands upon his chest.
Then place the root of your palm upon the root of his nose between his eyes. Wherever therefore your middle finger arrives, mark that spot with a cautery.
Then with an Olive-shaped Cautery: whose form is this.
Then place it upon the spot marked with the cautery, with descent, whereby your hand is gradually constricted, and you revolve it. Then quickly lift your hand and look at the place.
If you see that a quantity of the head equal to a small almond, or a quantity of rue, has already been exposed from the bone, then raise your hand. And if not, repeat your hand with the iron itself, or with another from it if it becomes cold: until the bones which I told you appear.
Then take some salt and dissolve it in water, and soak the cotton wool in it, and place it upon the spot; and leave it for three days.
Then place cotton wool soaked in butter upon it, and leave it upon the spot until the cautery burn is destroyed. Then treat it with Tetrapharmakon ointment until it heals.
They have said that the more a wound remains open, the more it emits pus; therefore it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them have said that the skin should be cauterized down to the bone; and the cautery should be held until something of the thickness of bone is hardened.
Then after that which has been burned is scraped away from the bone, then it is treated.
And others say that it is necessary with the cautery to reach the final point until it makes an impression on the bone so deep that the bone falls out; this is done like the shape of a kirate, or an instrument which women put in infused with a small alphabet: and they think that vapors from the head exhale from this place, and the wound is left open for a long time.
Then it should be cared for until it becomes solid.
But to me these two kinds of cautery do not seem at all suitable except in certain people according to the way of fear.
And to dismiss him is better with me than his health.
For the head is weakened by the breaking of its natural continuity as we have testified in other members and especially when the head of a weak person is naturally frail; and indeed the first kind of cautery is safer and better for me, and I use it: therefore operate with it in safety.
Chapter III.
When chronic pain occurs throughout the whole head and it is prolonged in a weak person, and they use hot baths, and cooking pots, and head-wraps, and oils, and poultices. And especially if it has already been cauterized with one cautery, which we have described, and none of those things helps them, then consider. For if the head of a weak person is strong by nature and not frail, and they find intense cold then cauterize with another cautery under that one slightly. Then cauterize them over the whole horn of their head with a cautery so that it does not go through the skin and uncover a quantity from the bone, as we have described. And cauterize them with one cautery on the back of their head in the place called "vas," which is the place where a windsock is placed, and elevate your hand in this place, and do not uncover the bone. For the weak person finds because of that intense pain, and different from the pain of all other head cauteries.
And I say this cautery in its place and it is necessary that it be a cautery with which the horns of the head are cauterized, and the back of their head with a more subtle cautery with which the middle of the head is cauterized.
Chapter IV.
When pain and swelling occur in a part of the head, or the pain extends as far as the eye, and the head is cleansed with purifying medicines, and the remaining treatment, which I have mentioned in the divisions of diseases, is administered, and it does not all resolve: then cauterization is appropriate in this case according to two methods: either cauterization with a sharp, burning medicine; or with iron.
Cauterization with a sharp, burning medicine is done as follows: you take one clove of garlic, and remove its outer layers, and cut off its ends from both sides. Then, during a time of bloodletting, split the area of pain until a spot under the skin is made where the tooth will be held.
Therefore insert it into the skin itself until it is concealed; then bind it tightly with a bandage of appropriate constriction and leave it for fifteen hours. Then loosen it and remove the garlic, and let the wound rest for two or three days; afterwards place upon it a poultice steeped in butter until the area produces pus; then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish to do this with certain burning medicines, which I have written about in the twelfth treatise, On Burning Medicines.
Cauterization of it with iron is done as follows. Heat a cautery iron, which has this form.
And it is called a "Clauilis" because the shape of its head is like that of a key, which has a certain curvature, and in its middle there is a small prominence.
Then place it on the spot and hold your hand steady; and revolve the iron gradually with speed; and let the quantity that is cauterized be half the thickness of the skin. And raise your hand so that the artery which is below is not injured and bleeding occurs.
Then soak a swab in salt water and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days; then place the swab with butter; afterwards treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize this half-skull with the second point of the cautery. And be careful not to cut an artery in this half-skull, not an old one properly.
Concerning the way of cauterizing an old half-skull.
When you treat a half-skull with what we have said from the preceding treatment and what we have said in the divisions of diseases, and the treatment does not succeed; and you see from the illness that it is not sufficient for it what we have said from the first cautery with medicine or with fire, then it is necessary that you ignite the knife-shaped cautery until it becomes white after you have marked the place of pain with a line, whose length is half a finger, or so; and place your hand on it once, and squeeze it until you strike the artery and reach the mouth.
However it is necessary for you to be careful from the continuation of the jawbone, which moves at chewing, lest its side is injured or the nerve that moves it, whence a spasm occurs.
And be on guard and cautious about the flow of blood from the artery which has been severed. For there is fear in its severance and especially for him who does not know what he is doing and is not studious or experienced; and he abandons the operation with it at first.
And I will come with a remembrance of the regimen of blood flow occurring from an artery according to its own way and in its place in this book.
If you see from the illness that this cautery is not sufficient for it, and you see a weak body enduring cautery in the middle of the head, as we have described, care for the wound until it heals.
And if you wish, apply cautery, as we said in the chapter on extracting an artery with cautery having two knives. For this cauterization is better and more effective.
On the method of cauterizing ear pain.
When pain occurs in the ear from cold and is treated with solutions and the remaining care as we said in the division, and the pain is not removed, then cautery by fire: and that is what is called a point, whose form is this.
Then points with it after its ignition around the whole ear, as it revolves: or around both if pain is present in both at the same time. And distance yourself with the cautery from the root of the ear a little, after you have marked the places with cautery paste: and let the quantity of the cautery be ten points in each ear, and like that.
Then care for the places until they heal.
On the method of cautery for a fistula.
Chapter Seven.
A fistula that is treated with cautery is not except from the kinds which arise from phlegm, according to what we said in the divisions of illnesses.
And avoid cautery for the kinds that arise from dryness and nerve spasm.
When you treat this kind of fistula with solutions and poultices and gargles, and your treatment does not succeed, then it is necessary that you cauterize the weak person with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and a second a little below its temple, and a third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery opposite the weak part. For softening does not happen except in the part which appears healthy.
And the form of the cautery is that you cauterize it itself with the cautery in the direct extremity of the upper part of the ear under the horn of the head a little, and at another time: its length being according to the length of the thumb. And place your hand with the cautery until a quantity equal to half the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery and it is a species from the kind of knife, its shape having been presented previously: however, it is not thinner than that by a little, as you see: and it must be such that the knife in it has a little superfluous thickness.
Then care for the places with what preceded until they are healed.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in old apoplexy.
When apoplexy becomes old and you treat it with what we said, and your medication does not take effect, and the sick person does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries over all of his horn of the head, and a cautery in the middle of the head as we said, and a cautery on the back of the head according to what preceded: and let the manner of the cautery be according to what preceded.
Also, it is cauterized with a cautery over the mouth of the stomach and it is the last resort.
Then care for it with what preceded.
Chapter Nine.
It is necessary that first strong hyssop be given to the sick person in a drink, and pills which purify the brain.
Then shave the entire head of the sick person and place on the back of his head a plaster of synop as described in the treatise of plasters, and apply it several times.
For this is the method of cautery; and do it according to the same order that I said there.
If therefore it heals thereby, it is good. If not: then make for him three cauteries on the posterior part of his head, which are descending from the upper part of the head down to the lower part of the eye; and put a finger's breadth between each cautery.
Then care for the cautery as was done before.
But if you wish an addition, and the weak person can tolerate it: then make a cautery for him in the middle. But if you wish an addition: then cauterize it above the two horns.
Then care for it until it heals; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form that was given before.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in paralysis, and softening.
Chapter Ten.
It is necessary that you proceed in the cleansing of the head with hyssop, and with what we said.
Then shave the head of the sick person; afterwards cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with a cautery above each horn of the head, and with a cautery above the back part of it, and with three above the vertebrae of the neck.
But if you are occupied in the illness with softening of the body by many of those things and the sick person is able to tolerate it and the illness is strong: then cauterize him with four cauteries above the vertebrae of the back, and last of all with a cautery until most of it is burned from his skin, and lift up your hand. Then care for it until it heals; and thus the olive-shaped cautery.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in epilepsy.
An epileptic is not cauterized unless he whose epilepsy is from phlegm.
Therefore it is necessary that you cleanse his brain first with vinegar, and with the remaining treatment which we mentioned in the division; when he is a large invalid, or tolerant in the reception of medicines.
But if he is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then a gargle and cleaning chews are administered for the brain, before that for many days with improvement of food.
Then shave his head, afterwards cauterize it with one cautery in the middle of the head, according to what preceded in the manner; and with another cautery on the back of his head, and with a cautery over all the horn of his head. But if the invalid is strong and tolerant, then cauterize him with the cauteries which I said in the one having paralysis, and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck, and the vertebrae of the back; and let the cautery be olive according to the manner which preceded.
But if the invalid is a child, then place a subtle cautery according to this manner.
On the manner of cauterizing in melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize him with the cauteries which we said in the one having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is a superfluity inclined towards melancholy, and the body of the invalid is moist, then give him a drink that will cleanse his brain, according to what preceded in the division; then shave the head of the invalid, and afterwards make a well-made tourniquet from linen, like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the head; and the invalid sitting upright must be held from every side.
Then present the liniment. And it is more fitting to make it from old sheep's butter. And heat it over a fire with temperate heating, which the finger can tolerate when immersed in it. Then evacuate it in the middle of its head in a circle, and leave it alone until it becomes cold.
Do that to the weak one once a week, with the rest of its good regimen, until it is healed.
Or if you wish, cauterize it by making many small points on it, except that which you hold with the cautery: let there be a smell.
For this kind of cautery moistens the brain with quality.
Then put a swab soaked in butter, or chicken fat on top of it.
On the method of cauterizing descending to the eye in water.
Chapter Thirteen.
When the beginning of water is declared to you in the eye by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and make the weak one drink, with that which cleanses its head.
And keep it from all dampness, and make it sit in a bath, fasting for several days.
Then order it to shave its head, and cauterize it in the middle of its head. Then cauterize it above the two temples with two cauteries, if there is a beginning of the descent of water in both eyes at the same time: or from one side, if there is a beginning of water in one eye: and cut off with the cautery all the veins and arteries that are under the skin: and let the cautery be long in width to the temples: and beware of the flow of blood.
For if you see anything from it, then cut it off immediately with whatever medicine is possible: and I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and their cutting, and caution against the flow of blood.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck, under the two bones, with two cauteries lastly produced.
On the method of cauterizing old tears.
When tears of the eyes are old, persistent, and are upon the veins and arteries which are on the exterior of the head manifest, it is verified that this is from cold, phlegmatic superfluities; then cauterize with the same cautery as I have described in the beginning of descending water, a cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries above the two temples, and two cauteries on the neck beneath the two bones. And if it does not yield with addition, then cauterize it on every side cautiously above the eye, upon the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Concerning the way of cauterizing in a foul smell of the nose.
When you treat it with what we said in the division and medication does not work; then hurry, and give in a drink three nights of infirmocochias; then shave its head and cauterize it with a medium cautery, with an olive oil cautery. Then cauterize it with a clove cautery two cauteries, above the two eyebrows a little under the hairs.
And guard from the artery so that you do not strike it.
And this is the form of a clove cautery.
Concerning the way of cauterizing in relaxation of the eyelid.
When the eyelid of the eye is relaxed from illness or humidity; then cauterize the eyelid with one cautery, with this lunar cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize it above the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries on every side; and they are elongated from the two temples; and let the length of the whole cautery be according to the lengths of the eyebrow; and do not stop your hand with the cautery, but rather according to the amount that is cauterized as a third eyelid.
On the method of cauterizing an eyelid when the ingrown hairs are stinging the eye.
A cautery is done in two ways: either with fire or with a burning medicine.
But in a cautery with fire, instruct the patient beforehand to let his hairs grow out, if he is one of those who removes them, until they are lengthened and even. But if they sting him at their origin, then bind his eyes with a bandage so that they do not move until they grow out.
When they have therefore grown out and are even, then place the patient's head in your lap; then mark on the eyelid of his eyes with a cautery, a mark which is according to the shape of a myrtle leaf: and let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs.
Then place a swab soaked in albumin, or in psyllium mucilage on the eye.
Then apply the cautery with fire, which has this shape.
Then cauterize over the figure which you have marked gradually in many applications until the surface of the skin which is like the shape of a myrtle leaf, appears entirely and properly burned.
And the sign of the success of your work is this: that if you see the eyelid of the eye already contracting and the hairs rising at the puncture of the eye.
Therefore raise your hand then, and let him go for three days.
Then place a swab with butter on it until the eschar is removed. Then care for him with ointment until he is healed.
If any of the hairs return after an hour and the eyelid softens, then repeat the cautery on that place as you did at first.
If, however, the hairs are below: then cauterize it until it rises to its natural place and becomes equal so that the hairs do not sting the eye.
It is as if you should direct the sick person to let out the hairs until they are lengthened and equalized. Make from paper or cloth a shape of a myrtle leaf.
Then take from known soap and from lime not soaked an ounce one or so from each; then grind them together with good friction and do it quickly so that it does not congeal. Then from the pan put it onto the paper which you made like the shape of a myrtle leaf and place it on the eyelid of one or both eyes. And place under the eye a swab soaked in albuminous material; and let the head of the sick person be in your lap.
And place your index finger on top of the medicine and press it for a short time. And you will move it whenever the sick person feels the bite of the medicine; because he finds its bite like fire.
While therefore he perseveres in this that he finds a bite, then let go the medicine and move it with your finger. When therefore the bite rests, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And consider then if you see the eyelid rise as it rises with fire or with an incision, it is good; and if not, then repeat upon it from the medicine upon the place in which the medicine does not imprint and does not blacken until your operation is equal and the eye contracts.
Then put on it a swab with butter until the skin of the burn is eradicated. Then care for it with diaphinicon ointment or another until it heals.
And it is necessary for you, during the operation, to keep the closest watch, so that nothing from the medicine may fall into the eye.
And if the eyelid softens after a few days, and something from the hairs fights its way into the eye, then repeat the medicine upon that place which softens from the eyelid itself, just as you did at first. Then take care of it until it is healed.
And this is the form of a myrtle leaf.
And know that the eyes of men are diversified in size and equality. Therefore let your consideration be according to that, and let the way of righteousness not be hidden from him who has a desire for this art.
On the manner of cauterizing in a tear fistula.
When you treat a fistula, as we said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatment does not succeed, then it is necessary for you to cauterize it according to this method.
Instruct the sick person to place his head in your lap and let a minister hold his head between his hands so that it may not be moved nor shaken with his head.
Then place cotton infused in alum or in the mucilage of flaxseed over his eye; then with fire a cautery, whose shape is this.
Let it be concave, like the shape of a hawk's feather quill from one end, with which the cautery is made; and if you wish it to penetrate up to the other extremity, and if you wish it to go upward then try this way.
However this concave shape is better for your purpose.
Then express the fistula, if it is open, and draw out the pus from it and dry it; and if it is not open, then open it and draw out its pus.
Then place upon it the cautery which has been ignited very hot.
Hold your hand for a short time with it near the cautery by the eye, towards the side of the nose, so that your hand does not stray, or the weak person become restless; and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and burn it.
Therefore if you reach at the beginning of your cautery up to the mouth, it will be well. And if not: then repeat the cautery once, or twice, if it is necessary with that: and leave it for three days.
Then apply a compress with butter, and care for it with a drying ointment until it is healed.
And if forty days pass and it does not heal, then put upon it a sharp corrosive medicine until the mouth is exposed; and scrape it according to what comes in its chapter.
And there is another way of cautery for a fistula, which some of the first have said. Attend to the place of the fistula and find it; then place in the fissure a thin cane, that is, a thin cannula, whose form is this. And pour into it a quantity of a drachma of melted lead, and hold your hand with the cane in a good grip, and let the weak person not move at all, so that the melted lead does not run or reach their eye.
And it is necessary that you place upon the eye of the weak person a compress soaked in albumin, or in water.
For the lead burns the place of the fistula and heals it with a marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said from cautery and treatment, it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to administer a nasal foramen and reduce the fistula back into the course of the nose, according to what will come in its proper place.
Concerning the way of cauterizing fissures of the lips.
Very often fissures occur in the lip, which are called pili, and especially in the lips of children.
Therefore, when you treat these fissures as we said in the division of diseases, and the treatment does not work, then a small knife-shaped branding iron should be applied with fire according to this form.
And its concavity should be according to the subtlety of the knife.
Then quickly place the heated branding iron itself into the fissures themselves until the branding iron reaches the depth of the fissures.
Then treat it with cerate until it heals.
On the method of branding a fistula of the mouth.
When an abscess occurs at the root of the gum, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth; then it makes pus and bursts: afterwards it becomes chronic, and pus runs out, and a fistula forms: then you treat it, and treatment does not work, then it is necessary that you apply a branding iron with fire according to the size that fits in the fistula. Then insert the heated branding iron into the fistula opening and hold your hand there until the heated iron reaches its depth and end; do this once or twice.
Then treat it afterward with what we said about treatment until it is cured.
If therefore the discharge is cut off and it heals, it will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to expose the place and remove the corrupt bone according to what will come in its chapter.
On the method of branding gums and softened teeth.
When the gum softens due to humidity and the teeth loosen, and you treat it with medicine but it does not work, then place the head of the weak person in your lap.
Then a cautery iron, the shape of which will come after this, so that you place the cannula over the tooth; and insert into it the ignited cautery quickly: and hold your hand for a short time until the weak one feels the heat of the fire has already reached the root of the tooth.
And raise your hand; then repeat the cautery several times, according to your wish.
Then let the weak one fill his mouth with salt water and hold it for one hour; and spit it out.
For the tooth motion is strengthened, and the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupted moisture is dried.
Concerning the way of cauterizing in toothache.
When toothache is due to coldness, or there is cold itself in it, or a worm, and treatment with medicines does not help; then the cautery is used on it according to two methods: either a cautery with butter, or a cautery with fire.
But the cautery of it with butter is, that you take vaccinated butter, and boil it in an iron spoon, or in a crucible. Then take a wick, and wrap it over the end of the tent. Then dip it into the boiling butter; and place it over the painful tooth quickly, and hold it until it cools; then repeat it several times, until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, dip wool, or a wick in cold butter, and place it over the aching tooth; and place ignited iron over it until the fire reaches the depth of the cavity of the tooth.
But cauterization with fire is, that you apply a tube of air, or a tube of iron. And let something of thickness be in its body so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the weak one.
Then a cautery by fire, whose shape will come; and place it upon that tooth; and hold your hand until the cautery becomes cold.
Do this several times, for the pain will be removed, either on that same day or another day.
And it is necessary in the impression of that cautery, that the sick person fill his mouth with good butter, and hold it for an hour; then he spits it out.
And this is the form of the cautery.
Cauterize with whichever extremity you wish according to what is possible; and this is the form of the cannula.
On the manner of cauterizing in fistulas.
When fistulas are from phlegm, and from cold humidities, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, and you wish to digest them quickly; then a concave cautery by fire, whose form is this.
Having two open extremities, so that the smoke may exit at the cautery from one extremity; and place it ignited upon the abscess once, and a second time, if necessary with it, until it reaches the depth of the abscess.
Which if the abscess is small; then place the cautery according to the size of the abscess.
Then leave it for three days, and place upon it cotton infused in butter, until what the fire burned is removed.
Then care for it with tooth salve until the shape of the cannula is healed.
On the way of cauterizing in hoarseness of voice and constriction of breathing.
When humidities overcome the channel of the lung and especially when it is with coldness of complexion then it is necessary that the weak one be evacuated first with solutions.
Then cauterize it at night at the root of the throat in a depressed place and be careful not to reach the throat with the cautery nor the skin unless a little of it.
Then cauterize it with another cautery at the juncture of the neck at the last vertebra of its end and let the cautery be gentle according to the way which preceded.
Then care for it with that which preceded until it is healed.
On the way of cauterizing in illnesses of the Lung and Cough.
When Cough and illness of the Lung are from cold humidities and the weak one does not have a fever nor phthisis and the illness is old then cauterize it with two cauteries above the fork in depressed, gentle, empty places. And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two nipples and let the cautery be of a cannula according to the form which preceded.
And if your cauterization wishes to be by pricking with a cautery which is called a Point, whose form preceded in the cauterization of ear pain and let there be points from thirty points up to almost others.
Then care for it with that which preceded until it is healed.
And let the cautery have three branches according to this form. Therefore cauterization is relieved with it when you do it with it with one three cauteries.
Chapter Twenty-Seven.
When the head of the humerus is dislocated due to humidity and does not return to its place within an hour, until it becomes accustomed to this displacement, then it dislocates from a slight movement, which happens as we have already testified, then it is necessary that you first reduce the dislocation. Then the weak person is placed on their back or on their sound side. Then lift the skin which is inside the shoulder joint upwards with the fingers of your left hand; and if the joint dislocates inwards.
Then, having a cautery with two points. Whose shape is this.
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side, and a cauterization mark will appear with four points.
And sometimes the cauterization is done with a cautery having three points, so that the cauterization mark then has six points; and the points are chosen according to subtlety.
And this is the shape of a cautery having three points.
And sometimes one more is added in this way, so there are eight cauteries.
Then place pounded leeks with salt on top of the cautery. Then make the weak person adhere to tranquility so that the limb is not moved for a while until it is strengthened.
And if the dislocation is upwards, and this rarely happens, then cauterize it above the shoulder with a clauile cautery or by pricking with many cauteries.
For the joint is strengthened and the humidity is removed; and the weak person is healed.
On the method of cauterizing the stomach.
When cold and much humidity happen in the stomach, until they draw it from its complexion, and catarrhs are multiplied to it, and assiduous modes of treatment are applied, and they do not help: then it is necessary that the sick person be put on his back, and extend his legs and arms. Then cauterize with three cauteries, a cautery under the size of a spoon's handle on the breastbone, a cautery on the clavicle, and two cauteries below from both sides of the one cautery, until a triangular figure of the cauteries comes. And space them apart so they do not join together when they make pus.
And let the depth of the cautery be the quantity of two-thirds the thickness of the skin.
And let the figure of the cauteries be according to this form without addition: and if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and let the cautery by which this cautery is made be one according to the figure of a circle according to this form.
And the stomach is cauterized by pricking it for him who is terrified from this cautery: and it is that you sign upon the stomach a point according to the quantity which you wish with encausto; then cauterize it with a point cautery; then treat it with the treatment that preceded until it is healed.
Concerning the manner of cauterizing a cold epar.
When pain happens in the epar from coldness and humidity, or from thick windiness, until superfluity departs from its natural complexion by egress, and the sick person is treated with what we have said, and does not make progress in it: then it is necessary that the sick person be put on his neck, and three cauteries be signed with encausto according to this figure, and the same quantity above the epar below the hypochondria, where a man's elbow reaches: and let the space which is between every cautery be according to the thickness of a finger: and let the cautery be straight according to the length of the body: and do not press your hand much with the cautery.
And let the quantity thereof which is cauterized be from the thickness of the skin, the quantity of half of it not added; and let the weak man stand upon his own feet.
But if he is not standing, then let him lie down, who has already extended his legs, and raised his arms.
This is the form of a cautery.
And it is indeed possible for you to cauterize with this cautery using a knife cautery, when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
And guard yourself so that you do not proceed too far in the cauterization, and the thickness of all the skin is cauterized, wherefore the whole body is cauterized, and it reaches the intestines: because the skin there is subtle, know therefore that.
Concerning the manner of cauterizing liver abscesses.
When it happens that you wish to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver, or in its tunic: then if it is in the flesh of the liver, it assails the sick person with pain and gravity without sharpness; and if it is in the tunic of the liver, with pain there is vehement sharpness: and you see now that it has fatigued the physicians who treated him.
Therefore, it is necessary for the sick person to recline on his neck. Then figure the place of the abscess with a heated cautery; then ignite the cautery which resembles a ray. And this is its form. And cauterize with that one cautery until all the skin is burned and it reaches the siphac, until all the pus comes out; then treat it with the treatment of exit wounds until it is healed.
And it is not necessary for one to use this kind of cautery except for someone whose study in the art of medicine is prolonged; and through whose hands these kinds of illnesses run with frequent experiment; then let him dare to perform this type of operation.
As for dismissing her, I prefer to do so myself.
On the Method of Cauterizing in Pleuresy.
The ancients said that a cautery with the roots of aristolochia should be applied to cold pleurisy in this way. And it is that you should take a long dry root of aristolochia and choose the longest one, which is found among them, and let it be as thick as a finger. Then submerge it in oil and ignite it in fire. Then cauterize with one cautery in that which is between the continuation of the collarbone and the neck, and with two small cauteries under the shoulder blades a little lower towards the part which is under the beard.
And also with two cauteries in that which is between the fifth and sixth ribs a little lower towards the back; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach. And with three cauteries from the back: one in that which is between the two shoulder blades; and two cauteries from the two sides of the chest, lower than the cautery which is between the two shoulder blades.
And it is not necessary that you press your hand with the cautery, rather let it be manifest on the skin while smelling.
And now some ancients have said that there are men who use a cautery of iron similar to a rod; and they ignite it and insert it into that which is between the ribs, until it reaches the abscess itself, and pus comes out; as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
But in this perforation with a cautery there is fear, that either the weak one dies immediately, or a fistula occurs in the place, which has no healing.
On the Method of Cauterizing the Spleen Chapter Thirty-Two.
When you treat a disease of the spleen, as we said in the treatment of divisions of diseases, and your treatment does not succeed, then there is cautery on it according to three ways, which are all right.
One of them is to make three or four cauteries by cutting along the length of the spleen according to the shape of liver cauteries, whose figure precedes it.
And let there be a quantity equal to the thickness of a finger, or more or less, between every cautery.
And let the mode of the cautery be equal as we said in liver cautery.
And do not press your hand with the cautery, and let the patient be lying on his back.
And another way of cauterization is: to have a cautery with two points, as we said in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the skin which is directly over the spleen where the left elbow of the patient reaches; and let your elevation be such that you lift the skin according to the width of the body so that the cauteries may fall according to the length of the body.
Then insert the two burning points deeply until you penetrate the skin on the other side; then withdraw the cautery; thus making four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with another cautery having three points.
Then care for the cautery after you have let it discharge pus for many days; for it is more effective than any other treatment which precedes it.
On the method of cauterizing in dropsy.
Cautery does not apply to dropsy unless it is specifically ascites.
When you treat dropsy with the methods of treatment which we mentioned in the division, and the treatment does not succeed, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with four cauteries around the navel, and one cautery above the stomach, and another above the liver, and another on the spleen, and two cauteries behind the back between the vertebrae, and one directly on the chest, and another directly on the stomach; and let the depth of the cautery be near the thickness of the skin.
Then let the open cautery be dismissed, so that it emits pus over a long time.
And do not discharge the weak one from treatment after the cautery with it, for two intentions must gather for him, and healing will hasten to him with God's help.
The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be clauilis, according to its aforementioned shape; and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped, according to its aforementioned shape.
On the method of cauterizing the feet and legs.
When abscesses form in a dropsy and are filled with clear water, you should cauterize on the back of the foot in the nocrati region, which is between the auricular and annular regions; raise your hand with the cautery, and do not twist it; then raise your hand and do not move it at all.
For the clear water will be reddish, and the cautery should be of this shape.
Then make two cauteries on each leg, and let the cautery be made with the sharp end of the cautery; and let the cautery be made according to the length of the leg, one below the knee and the other below it, about the middle of the leg; and two cauteries on the whole thigh; and let the open cautery be dismissed without treatment for a long time so that some water may exude from it; then treat it with the rest that we have mentioned.
On the method of cauterizing in abdominal rupture.
Chapter XXXV.
When there is an abdominal rupture from cold and humidity until the retentive and digestive powers which are in the stomach and intestines weaken, and it is treated with treatments but does not heal; and you see the weak patient tolerating a cautery of abundant power, then cauterize him with a large cautery on his stomach according to what preceded regarding cauterization of the stomach with a circular cautery, and four slender cauteries in a circle around the navel with a slender clauilis cautery; and a cautery above the groin with a large one, or two cauteries.
And if you see abundant moistures, and the patient weak enduring that, then cauterize it with a cautery over the comb, and with a cautery over all the groin; and perhaps you will add two small cauteries over the stomach near the large one.
For it is a progressing cure whose benefit does not err.
On the manner of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Chapter Thirty-Six.
When there are many old hemorrhoids in the anus, or one, and they are from thick, cold humors, or corrupted humors, and they are cured with what we said in the division, and the cure does not help; then cauterize with three cauteries over the lower vertebra of the back under the scapula a little triangularly, and a cautery under the navel like two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is chilled, and his food is not digested, and you see his face inflamed, then cauterize him over the stomach with a large cautery, according to what preceded; and with a cautery over his liver, and another over his spleen, with a clauili cautery: and leave the cautery open for some time; then care for him until he is healed.
Chapter Thirty-Seven.
When you excise atheromas, then heat a cautery that resembles a ray. Then insert the ignited one into the excised atheroma; and keep your hand until the cautery reaches the orifice of the vein from which blood flows; do that once or twice.
Therefore, if there are many atheromas, then cauterize each one with a cautery according to what we have narrated. Then care for them with what helps them from ointments until they are healed.
And if you cauterize it with a large cautery iron above the ligature, it is best for healing.
On the method of cauterizing a fistula in the anus.
Chapter Thirty-Eight.
When the sick person does not obey the incision and work which we have described in its place, and is terrified by it, perhaps he is healed with a cautery.
Therefore when it happens to someone that a fistula becomes old, pus runs from it, and corrupt humors. It is therefore fitting to do what is necessary, so that you examine it with a delicate probe. Then ascertain the depth of it with a probe.
Then ignite a cautery iron which is similar to a spoke. Then insert the ignited iron into the fistula itself and mark the amount that it entered.
And repeat the cautery upon it until all those corrupt substances are burned, once, or twice, or thrice, according to the necessity of your judgment.
And be careful of burning a nerve if it is there, or a large vein; or if the fistula goes towards the bladder or towards the intestines, then beware of all those places.
And do not do this unless when the fistula is in a fleshy place and you consider that it is not penetrating.
Then care for the place until it heals.
But if the place is sealed and materials are cut away from it, and it remains so for a long time, then know that it has now been healed completely.
And if materials are not cut away from it, then know that it is penetrating, or deep within it there is a corrupt opening, or something like that, of which the remembrance will come in its place.
On the method of cauterizing the kidneys.
When pain occurs in the kidneys from cold, or from thick windiness, and it diminishes because of that weakness of his, then it is necessary to cauterize it over the almethenem over the kidneys themselves, with a cautery on all the kidney with a clauili cautery, of which remembrance preceded.
And perhaps we cauterize it a second time in the very same almeidat. Therefore three lines will come. Therefore they will be better for relief.
Concerning the manner of cauterizing the bladder.
When weakness and softening occur in the bladder from cold and humidities, until the sick person does not retain urine, then cauterize it on the lower part of the pubis over the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic region begin, and with a cautery from the right side of the pubis, and another from the left side of it: and let the length of that cauterization be according to the size of a thumb-joint: and cauterize it with a lower back cautery, or two cauteries if necessary for that: and let it be according to what preceded, a clauili cautery.
Concerning the manner of cauterizing the uterus.
When cold and humidities occur in the uterus, and it is forbidden by that from impregnation, and its menses are corrupted, and their provocation is delayed, and pain occurs to her at their arrival, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we said in the cauterization of the bladder, and with a lower back cautery, or two cauteries: and let the cautery be clauile.
Concerning the manner of cauterizing the shoulder in dislocation.
When mucosal humidities are poured into the socket of the shoulder, and they become the cause of its exit from its place: and the sign of it is that one leg is extended over the other, when they are compared to each other: and a vacant place is found in it.
Therefore, it is necessary that you cauterize the weak cautery upon the pitch of Anchae itself with a circle similar to the cautery; after you have marked with encaustic a circle around the pitch, as it revolves: and so that the pitch itself may fall in the middle of the circle.
But if you do not have this cautery present, then cauterize it with three cauteries, with a large olive cautery; and let the depth of the cautery be according to the amount of the thickness of the skin throughout.
Then care for it until it is healed.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in sciatica.
When pain occurs in the pitch of Anchae, and its cause is cold and humidity; and the weak one is cured with that which we said in the division, and the cure does not avail, and it becomes old: then it is necessary to dissolve the weak one from thick humors with fetid pills, or with artificial pills, and the like. Then cauterize him.
And the method of cautery in this is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
Cautery with fire is according to many methods.
One of which is that you cauterize upon the pitch of Anchae itself with three triangular cauteries, according to this form. And make their depth good, or bad. And let the space which is between every cautery be of the thickness of a finger: and let the cautery be an olive one.
Sometimes, however, cautery is done in the middle above the head of Anchae itself. Therefore there are four cauteries.
And if you wish to cauterize with a circle, whose shape precedes in the cauterization of a wide dislocation, make it one: so that it is a circle containing the whole dislocation.
And burn the thickness of all the skin.
This is the method of cautery in sciatica, when the pain is adherent to the wide area itself, and does not extend up to the thigh and leg.
But if it extends up to the thigh and leg, then cauterize it with two cauteries above the thigh, above the place to which the sick person points there, in which there is pain, and your cautery above the calf four fingers towards the wooded side a little: and let the cautery be a knife-like one.
And let the depth of the cautery be according to the depth of the thickness of the skin.
But if the sick person points out that the pain extends almost to the toes, then cauterize it there where he points with a point-like cautery, three, or four, or more, if it needs it.
And if he points out the pain to be below the knee towards the leg, then cauterize it there with one knife-like cautery.
And be careful in all your cauterizations, that you do not finish with the cautery so as to burn a nerve, or a large artery, and thereby bring upon the sick person an evil harm, or contraction.
And I myself have indeed already seen one and another, of those who cauterized above the calf, and finished in the cautery, and the leg swelled up, until a tumor reached the foot, and it was perforated all through, and the whole foot was corrupted: then there occurred a rupture of the belly, and death after that.
But if the pain is in two parts at the same time, cauterize both according to this method.
And certain wise men have said in the cauterization of a wide area, whose mode of cautery this is. Make a knife of iron, its diameter being half a palm; and let there be at its opening according to the thickness of the knuckle, or a little less: and within that knife let there be a third knife.
And let the space that is between all the knives be by the amount of a knuckle; and let the knives be open on two sides; and let their height be about a knuckle, or two knuckles; and make for them a handle of iron conveniently fitted to the knives.
Then heat it in fire until it glows and projects sparks; then place it on a pillow with the patient lying weakly on their healthy side. Then cauterize him with three round cauteries at once.
Then dismiss him for three days. Afterwards plaster with butter; and dismiss the open wound for many days. Then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
Says Albucasis, we have rarely used this kind of cautery, my son, on account of the terror of its appearance; and therefore because we have found few who will endure it.
Nevertheless it is among the good cauteries for him who endures it and finds its place with it.
But the cautery with healing medicines is for you to make two knives having a pierced handle into which descends the hinge pin of its gate from brass or iron, the length of a span; whose height shall be two knuckles, or as they are themselves.
And let the space that is between each one be the thickness of a finger; and let them be open below and above; and let what contains them to each other be according to this form.
Then place it on a broad pillow, the patient lying on their healthy side. And press your hand hard upon the broad pillow. Then pour between two circles hot water, which has been heated with fire for a short time, and hold it for the space of an hour: and let the sick person endure its bite and its burning, for he will find the bite like fire until the bite is quieted.
Then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away the hot water from the whole wound with fresh water; then leave it for three days.
And put butter upon it until the blackness of the burning is removed; then leave it for several days and let pus run from it. For this is the last resort in healing.
Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
But if the pain extends as far as the hip or leg: make him a bath containing water according to what you did for the wound equally.
And this is the method of hot water: and I have already written it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Take alkali and quicklime each a part: grind each and put them in a new pot, whose lower part is pierced with one small hole according to the quantity which enters the radius itself; and place under the bottom of the pot another glazed pot; and pour over the alkali and lime fresh water, which submerges both by a finger; after which you press them with your hand with good pressure; and let the pot stand until the sharp water descends into the lower part of the glazed pot.
Then add all that water and pour it over other lime; and strain until it is renewed.
For then it will be very strong and sharp, which is administered in many medical operations, and in the cauterization of other members. Because it effects the operation of fire itself.
And among medicines are those with which wounds are cauterized, also like turpentine and cashew nut honey, and lime with soap, so that both are thoroughly mixed.
And Galen indeed related the cure of a certain man from ancient times, by which he was cured of pain in the ankle and sciatic vein; and he praised it greatly. And he said that he needed no other treatment and that he was healed from one draught until he related that perhaps he had entered a bath carried in and came out of it already well.
And it is to be taken from the leaves of a green fig; and if green is not found, let it be taken dry, fresh; and it is mixed much with a little fat and placed on the ankle where there is pain, or the leg, or on the hip; and it is tied on and left for three hours, or by the amount which the sick person feels the heat subside. Then introduce him into a bath.
When therefore his body becomes hot, introduce him onto a couch. For the pain goes away, and he is healed.
And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use a cautery with these medicines unless after evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides who also said that when goat dung is cauterized with it, it applies it to the sciatic vein; and a cautery is made in this way. Take wool and soak it in old oil and place it on the deep spot which is between the thumb of the foot and the sole, and which is nearer to the sole.
Then take dry goat dung and inflame it in fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then place it on the wool and leave it until it goes out. Then repeat that. Do not therefore cease to do this until the feeling reaches through the middle up to the ankle and the pain subsides.
And this method of cautery is called the Vaccinum cautery.
On the Cauterization of Back Pain.
Sometimes pain occurs in the back from many causes, either from a fall, or a blow, or excessive evacuation, and similar things, from infusion of cold and humid matter; and cautery indeed does not apply except in this one kind, which is caused by infusion of cold matter.
Therefore it is necessary after evacuation of the sick person with fetid pills, and similar things, so that they are made on the back, where there is pain, three lines according to the width of the knife itself; after signs are made with a hot iron in every line five cauteries, or more according to the amount which comes from the endurance of the sick person's strength; and let the cauterization be done with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries, or four, with a middle-sized pointed cautery, according to this form.
On the Method of Cauterizing in the Beginning of a Hunchback.
Very often this illness happens to small infants.
And the sign of its beginning in children is: that a constriction occurs upon him in breathing near elevation, and motion; and in youths at the last vertebra of the back and its nodes, which has already begun to protrude above the other vertebrae.
When therefore you see that, and wish to do it, then cauterize it with a cautery which is a circle according to this form.
And let the cautery cover the whole part of the vertebra equally; and if you wish cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two lines or three, and let the points be close to each other.
Then care for the place until it heals with what we have said.
And beware, lest you administer cautery in a hunchback which is caused by spasm of a nerve.
On the method of cauterizing gout and joint pains.
When joint pains are from cold humors, which are poured out into any part of the body, then when they happen in the feet, it is customary for physicians to name that Podagra properly.
Therefore, when Podagra of a cold cause is treated with treatment methods and the pains are not removed, then cautery removes them.
And it is to cauterize him after evacuation around the joint of the feet with many cauteries; and let the cautery be olive wood.
And if it is necessary to prick on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. But if the pains rise up to the knees or other joints and this often happens then cauterize him over the whole knee with three or four cauteries from every side with the same olive wood cautery.
But if you need more with this cautery then cauterize him. And do not submerge your hand with the cautery but let it be approximately the thickness of the skin only.
But if pains rise to the knees and back then administer what we said from the cautery in its own chapter.
But if the pains are only in the hands then prick around the knuckles like two lines revolve.
But if any pain remains in the fingers then prick them on every knuckle and on the palm of the hand.
But if pains rise after days to the elbows or shoulders then cauterize both from every side.
And do not remove the weak person from a good regimen, from taking medicines. For if a good regimen is made and phlegm is evacuated he will be healed with the help of God with this cautery.
On the manner of cauterizing ruptures.
When a rupture occurs in the groin and the intestines or omentum descends to the testicle and it is beginning nearby, then it is necessary that you advise the sick man to abstain from food on his day. And let him use laxatives so that the feces may descend from his abdomen.
Then let him sit between your hands on his back and instruct him to hold his breath until it emerges or the omentum or intestines appear.
Then reduce it with your fingers and mark with a cautery under the rupture above the pubic bone, with a mark whose end is like half of a circle toward the upper part of the body.
Then apply the hot cautery, which has this shape, until it becomes white and projects sparks. Then reduce the intestines or omentum to its cavity. Then let the assistant place his hand on the spot so that the intestines do not come out and you have already opened between the sick man's thighs and placed a cushion underneath him, and one servant above his thighs and another above his chest who holds his hands.
Then place the cautery on the mark itself with your hand holding the cautery standing straight. And hold it until you have reached a bone with it or repeat another application if you did not reach a bone with the first one.
And carefully observe from the exit of the intestines during your cauterization so that you do not burn it and there comes harm upon the sick man or death or great injury.
And know that when you do not reach a bone with the cautery your operation is of no avail.
And it is necessary that the cautery be delicate like that for children according to their size.
Then care with the remaining ointments until it heals.
And let the weak one lie on his back for forty days until the wound is sealed.
And it is necessary that you provide him with nourishment for the length of his healing time, which soothes his belly so that the intestines do not protrude during straining and defecation.
Then when he wants to rise after forty days, then administer a bandage well made, and let him hold it for another forty days.
And he should abstain from labor, and the fullness of food and drink, and loud voices.
For when he uses this regimen, thus he heals with complete healing.
And I will speak of the treatment of ruptures with incision in its own chapter.
But when ruptures occur in the rest of the belly and are beginning and you wish that they not be added to, then cauterize his rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and let that which is burned be one-third of it from then on. Then care for him as we have said, and it will not be added to.
And now some first ones have said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form.
After it is signed with an encaustic and a line is put which is across the width on the upper side of the rupture, and another line below. And place your hand in the middle with the cautery held tight.
But the first cautery is easier and better.
On the way of cauterizing for pains because of a fall or blow.
Chapter 48
When pain occurs in certain limbs because of a fall or blow and that pain persists for a long time, and healing with medicine does not come upon it: then it is necessary that it be cauterized with a point cautery.
And let the cautery be for every member according to its size, and its suitability, and its weakness, and its power, and the placement of the twist, and the pain from it.
Then if it heals from the first cautery, it is well. If not, then repeat the cautery upon it.
For it is customary for these pains to change from one member to that which is next to it. Therefore it is necessary for you to pursue them with the cautery until the weak one is healed.
Concerning the manner of cauterizing leprosy.
Those with leprosy are sometimes greatly benefited by cautery. And especially the type of leprosy which occurs due to the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy: therefore when you wish to cauterize it consider.
Therefore if the leprosy is beginning, and you have treated it with that which we said in the division, and it does not descend nor remain stationary, and you fear for the weak one that corruption may spread over their whole complexion: then cauterize them on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and a second below it towards the forehead at the end of the hair, and two above the two temples, and one behind above the nape of the neck.
And with the last cautery press your hand upon it a little while until it makes a small impression on the bone, and the crusts are loosened from it: so that respiration of coarse vapors may be relieved from it, and also cauterize the spleen with a cautery according to what preceded.
But if the leprosy is already spread over the weak one and appears manifest then it is necessary for you to cauterize with these cauteries which we said upon the head, and a cautery upon the end of the nose, and two cauteries upon the two maxillae, and two cauteries upon the vertebrae of the neck, and six upon the vertebrae of the back, and one large one upon the alhaossos at the base of the tail and one above it, upon the very almeidati: and two upon the anchas: that is to say, upon every ancha with one, and two upon the knees: one upon every knee, and two upon the shoulders, and two upon the elbows, and two upon the soft parts of his chest: and cauterize him upon every joint, from the joints of the fingers of his hands and feet: and cauterize every heel of his feet and the focilla of his hands.
And beware of the nerves that are above the heel bone, so that you do not burn them.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery over the bone of the pectoral muscle, and with another over the bone of the stomach, and with another over the liver.
And know that the more you apply the cautery, the more beneficial it is and the more binding.
And know that a weak person does not find pain in the cautery, as healthy people do, because his body is already stunned.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be of magnitude and size according to the limbs and joints, as previously described from the types of instruments.
Then care for the cautery with flour of herbs mixed with honey, and other care, until it is healed.
On the manner of cauterizing in a stupor.
When a limb is in a stupor and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then cauterize the numb limb with cauteries according to the magnitude or smallness of the limb.
And let your cautery penetrate into the thickness of the skin a little. Then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
And sometimes it is cauterized for a certain stupor which occurs in the hand and foot, in the vertebrae of the back near the exit of the nerves that move the limb, and the stupor is removed.
But let no one presume to do this unless he is wise in the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of the nerves that move the body.
Chapter LI.
When an albare becomes old and nothing from medical arts is effective in it: then cauterize over it with a deep cautery for a short time, according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed and its color is changed.
Then care for it with herb flour, and lentils with rose oil, and arnoglossa leaves, and dove blood, and swallow blood: let there be one part of each; mix all these things together, and spread them on a cloth, and apply them to the place, until it is healed.
On the Method of Cauterizing Cancer.
When a cancer is beginning and you wish to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery all around it, as it revolves.
But the wise have said that it should be cauterized with a final cautery in the middle.
However, it does not seem right to me; for I fear that it will ulcerate; and I have already seen this happen many times.
And it is better that it be cauterized around it with a circle, as we said, or with many cauteries.
On the Method of Cauterizing Adenitis.
When someone has adenitis and it is delayed in ripening, either because of excess causing it, or because of the infirmity of age, when they are old and have little blood, or because of time, and you wish to hasten the ripening of the adenitis, then cauterize around it with many small cauteries, puncturing. Then leave it alone. For it will hasten with ripening.
But if you wish to perforate it with a cautery, then a hot iron cautery, which has this shape.
And place it in the middle of the adenitis until it penetrates the skin; and let the cautery be weak after that which follows so as to alleviate the course of pus.
Then care for it until it is healed.
On the Method of Cauterizing an Ulcerating Condition.
Chapter LIV.
A corrosion is nothing but a corruption walking in a member and corroding it; just as fire eats dry wood.
If therefore you see a corrosion in a place which can bear cautery with fire, then apply much cautery with fire, small and large clauiae, according to what suits the place where the corrosion is.
Then cauterize it from every side until you eradicate the entire corruption and nothing of it remains at all.
Then let it alone for three days, and put powdered sulfur mixed with oil on the cauterized places until all the eschars and all corruption are eradicated.
Then treat it with ointments that generate flesh.
If therefore you see that after three days healthy flesh is born in which there is no corruption, it is good.
And if not: then repeat the cautery on that which remains from the corrupt places.
And a corrosion is sometimes treated with an acute medicine. For it arises in the place of a cautery.
However, cautery with fire is of quicker healing; and I have already said its cauterization with an acute medicine in a division: therefore take that there when it is necessary.
On the Method of Cauterizing Warts and Corns.
Chapter LV.
Very often this ailment occurs in the lower parts of the feet; and it is a thick, filtered thing which injures the foot.
And indeed cautery in them is according to two methods: cautery with fire and cautery with hot water.
But as for that with fire, it should be a concave cautery similar to a vulture's claw, made of iron according to the size which contains the wart from every side; and let its margins be subtle.
Then lay it ignited upon the ulcer. Then turn your hand with the cautery around the ulcer until the cautery reaches the depth of the ulcer; and leave it for three days until it begins to discharge pus. Then plaster it with mullein leaves, crushed with salt; and leave the plaster upon it at night. For it will be eradicated from its roots.
Then treat the place with a flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
But if they are not inverted and often occur on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet; then apply to them a cautery with hot water: and it is such that you should take a cannula from bronze, or iron, or from a vulture's quill; and lay it upon the ulcer, or althelul. Then pour into the cannula a small amount of hot water; hold your hand and turn it with the pressure of your hand for a short time so that the edge of the cannula is impressed upon the root of the ulcer, and the hot water finds its way to the depth, to the root of the ulcer: and let the patient wait a little above the bite of the hot water for an hour.
Then leave it alone, for the ulcer will be eradicated with its roots.
Do this to them one by one until you come upon all of them that are in the body.
Then treat them after they are eradicated with that which generates flesh from ointments.
Concerning the Method of Cauterizing in Tremor
When it happens to someone that Tremor arises from cold in the nerve, or from quartan fever, or another cause; then it is necessary that you cauterize him with four cauteries, or five upon the vertebrae of the back, and between each vertebra a cautery, and one upon his chest, and one upon his stomach.
For tremor indeed ceases with an olive-wood cautery, and healing hastens for illnesses of cold nature.
On the Method of Cauterizing by Albatir.
Chapter Fifty-Seven.
Sometimes foul things, that is, pustules, are expelled from the body by Albatir, which are caused by corrupted thick humors.
Therefore, when they appear, it is necessary to cauterize them over the whole head of the pustule with a delicate cautery made of myrtle wood, whose end is ignited with fire. Or with a long aristolochia root. Or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
And sometimes they are cauterized at the very beginning of their expulsion in this way; and they do not grow larger; and the excess is broken up, making them, and they are healed from them.
However, it must be done after evacuation with bloodletting.
On the Method of Cauterizing in a Flow of Blood from an Artery in a Wound.
Very often it happens that there is a flow of blood from an artery which has been cut at a wound, which happens externally, or at the incision of an abscess, or a cautery of a limb, and similar things to these; and it becomes difficult to stop it.
Therefore, when this happens to someone, then hasten with your hand to the orifice of the artery, and place your index finger upon it; and press it very much until the blood is constricted beneath your finger, and nothing goes out from it.
Then place small olive-wood cauteries into the fire, and a great many of them; and blow upon them until they become thoroughly ignited.
Then take one of them, either small or large, according to the wound and the place in which the artery has been ruptured; and place the cautery upon it, after which you quickly remove your finger; and hold the cautery until the blood is cut off.
If it is expelled when you raise your finger from the opening of the artery and you extinguish the cautery, then quickly take another cautery, from those prepared in the fire.
Therefore do not cease to do that with one after another until the blood is severed.
And be careful not to burn the nerve which is there, and lest other harm befall the weak patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, then it is not possible to sever it: especially when the artery is large, except with one of four ways. Or with a cautery, as we have said. Or with extraction, when it is not extracted. For when it is extracted, its extremities are contracted and the blood is severed. Or it is tied with a strong ligature thread. Or medicines of a property which severs blood are placed upon it and it is constricted with a decent poultice constriction.
But he who performs its severance with a ligature and constriction with cloth or positioning of burning things and similar things does not quite bring it to a close except rarely.
But if it should happen to someone and there is neither a physician present nor medicine: then let him begin with the position of the index finger over the opening of the vein itself, as we have narrated, and a very strong constriction thereof until the blood is obstructed from the upper part of the wound and above the artery. And the finger should not be removed, but always with cold water of vehement coldness placed upon it until the blood freezes and thickens, and is severed.
And meanwhile he should consider what he needs from a cautery or medicine.
On Incision, Perforation, and Phlebotomy in Wounds and Similar Things.
We have already said in the First Chapter that every disease in which it is fitting to use fire with a cautery and burning medicine, its occasions, causes and instruments, and forms of cauteries.
And I have placed chapters there from the head down to the foot.
And I will proceed in this chapter the same way so that it may be relieved for the seeker who seeks his question.
And before I begin that, it is necessary that you learn, O sons, that in this chapter is from the fear that which is in the first chapter on cauterization.
And for that reason it is necessary that there be more caution in it, because in the operation which is in this chapter, very often evacuation occurs with blood, with which life stands at the opening of a vein, or incision over an abscess, or opening of an exit, or treatment of a wound, or extraction of an arrow, or incision over a stone, and those similar to them: from all of which trembling and fear are associated, and death falls upon many of them.
And I warn you, lest that which is hesitation falls upon you, for sometimes there fall upon you in this art ways of men with ways of illnesses. For from them is he who becomes angry with his illness, and death is light to him because of the vehemence of his which he finds from his sickness and length of its malice. And with illness is from fear which signifies death.
And from them is he who gives his flute player and enriches you with him, hoping for healing, and his illness is harmful.
Therefore it is not necessary that you consent to him who comes to you from them, whose way is such. And let your caution be more vehement than your greed and avarice. And do not presume upon anything from him unless after certain knowledge which verifies with you that to which praiseworthy succession arrives.
And use in the treatment of all your patients, prognosis and indication as to what is conveniently for their health.
For in that there is help to you on the acquisition of fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you His intellect, and not take away from you direction and inspiration: for that is in his hand.
And I myself ordained this chapter distinguishing by chapters, according to what preceded in the chapter of Cautery, from the neck down to the feet: so that it may be eased for you what you desire from it, and what you need.
On the treatment of Water which gathers in the heads of children.
Chapter I.
Know that this infirmity often happens to children at birth: or when the midwife tightens the head of the child without ease.
And whenever it also happens from a hidden cause which is not known.
And I myself have not seen this illness in others than in children: and to all of them whom I saw from them, death hastened: therefore for that reason it seemed to me to let go of the operation on it.
And I myself saw from them a child whose head was filled with water, and the head grew larger each day, until it could not sit upon itself because of the size of its head: and the moisture increased until he died.
And this indeed moisture, either gathers between the skin and bone: or it gathers under the bone above the suture.
And the operation in that case, if the moisture is between the skin and bone, and it is a small abscess, then it is necessary for you to make an incision in the middle of the head one finger wide: and let the length of the incision be as much as two knuckles, until the moisture runs out.
And this is the form of a spatula.
If therefore the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, then make those two fissures, according to this form.
And if the moisture is under the bone, and the sign of it is that you see the sutures of the head open on every side; and the water is depressed when you press it with your hand to its interior, and it is not concealed from you: then it is necessary for you to cut in the middle of the head with three fissures, according to this manner.
And after the incision extract all the moisture. Then bind the fissures with cloths and lint. Then embrocate it from above with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then loosen the bandage, and care for the wound with tents and ointments.
And do not let go binding the head with equality. And feed the weak person with all dry food of little humidity, until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another manner of incision is to consider where the magnitude of the abscess appears, and the collection of water.
For sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in the vertex, or on the right, or on the left.
Therefore ascend with the incision where you see the abscess and the filling of water; and split it according to what is possible for you.
And observe lest you fall upon an artery and there should occur a flow of blood, and the weak person should die from that flow with the evacuation of the moisture.
Concerning the Incision of Arteries Which are Behind the Ears.
Chapter II.
When it happens to someone that there are catarrs to the eyes, or to the chest, and it grows old, and healing is not brought by medicines; then the last cure in that case is the incision of those two arteries.
Therefore it is necessary when you wish to cut them, for the weak person to shave his head. Then rub the place with a rough cloth, so that the arteries may appear. Then let the weak man tie his neck with any of his cloths. Then consider where a vein pulses. And the places of both are the depressed places behind the ears: and they are rarely concealed, except in some men.
Then mark with a cautery above each vein; and cut through each with a sharp bistoury on both sides, the incision reaching to the mouth; and let this be done across the breadth of the head.
And if you wish, insert the bistoury under the artery and cut it upwards with an incision.
Let the length of the incision be like two fingers joined together.
For when a vein is cut, blood flows out in a throbbing stream, which leaps to the insides with frequent jumps.
But if the artery does not appear to the senses, then it is necessary to measure from the ear a space of three fingers. Then mark with a cautery and cut down to the mouth.
And what is necessary to let out from the blood is six ounces; and perhaps you may let out more or less from it. All of this according to the quantity which appears to you from the weakness of the man and the fullness of his artery.
Then consider the wound. Then if anything remains at the mouth of the wound from the cutting, cut that off so that a hot abscess may not occur; then bind the wound with bandages from linen cloth.
Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
Concerning the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
Chapter III.
When a man suffers from an old headache or sharp catarrh due to acrid humors and heat in the temples' muscles, or an old, vehement soda and similar ailments: and he is treated with methods of medical care and it does not work; then we have found experience in these illnesses of extracting arteries from the temples, or cauterizing them as we have described.
The manner of operating in the extraction of these is that the sick person should shave the hairs which are on the temples and stretch towards an apparent artery in the temple. For it indeed shows itself to you from its pulse and is rarely concealed except in a few men or by the violence of cold.
But if it is concealed from you, then let the sick person bind their head with any cloth of theirs; then rub the place with a rough cloth. Or steam the place with hot water until it appears to you manifestly. Then take the speculum, which I fashioned a little before. Then with it scrape away the skin easily until you reach the artery. Then thrust a hook into it and draw it upwards until you draw it out of the skin and make it come out from all the tunics that are under it.
But if the artery is slender: then enfold it with the extremity of the hook. Then cut from it a part according to the amount by which its ends are lengthened and contracted so that bleeding does not occur. For if it is not cut and not severed, the blood does not ascend thoroughly.
Then evacuate from the blood six ounces up to three.
But if the artery is large: then it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread or with threads of aloe, so that putrefaction does not hasten to it before the consolidation of the wound and bleeding occurs.
Then cut away the excess which is between the two ligatures. Do this in that hour or another hour afterward.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery up to the bone, with a knife cautery: until its ends are incised and it stands in place of the same operation.
And it is better work unless he who is weak has a fever or an overheated complexion. For cautery is one of those things which help to finish humidities. Therefore it is a better remedy.
And it is necessary after the extraction of arteries that the place be filled with old cooked lint and poultices made loosely be placed upon it.
And after the loosening it should be treated with dry medicines which cause flesh to grow and with ointments until it is healed.
But if while you are operating it should happen that there is a flow of blood from the artery then hurry to cut it off with a cautery or to fill the place with wax and press your hand upon it until the bleeding stops. But if none of those things are present to you then put your finger upon the place until the blood congeals. And embrocate the place with water of strong cold until the sharpness is calmed and it is bound as needed.
And because it is lighter and easier for the extraction of a vein it is to cauterize a vein with this cautery having two knives and let the sharpness of the two knives be similar to a razor. However they are of much less sharpness than two knives. For if they are sharp like two knives the cold rushes to both and they do not strike the flesh with speed. But since there is a little thickness in them the heat of the fire is retained in them and the flesh is cut quickly and by this means the work is better than all other works and lighter and easier.
And this is the form of the cautery.
And let the space which is between the two knives be the thickness of a finger after you mark two places with plaster and put both ignited strongly until they reach the mouth and strike the vein in two places so that what is between its ends is lengthened. For they are not thoroughly consolidated with this cautery.
Chapter IV.
Concerning the treatment of sharp, persistent courses of tears from the eyes.
When tears are persistent, and their course is from the veins which are above the outer part of the head; and no cure with medicine is effective against them; and you see the face of the sick person already reddening, and he feels a movement in his forehead like the movement of ants: and his eyes are weakened, moist, so that his eyelashes are already corroded with erosion; and his eyelids are heated from the sharpness of the tears: then the ancients used this operation for their cure, and they called it the Cure with the Sword.
And it is that you order the sick person to shave the hairs which are on his forehead. Then make three incisions in the forehead, equally spaced, according to the length of the forehead; and let the length of the incision be like two fingers, and one incision be equidistant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second a little after the length according to the movement of the temple muscles, and the third from the other side; and be careful not to cut the arteries which are on both sides; and extend your hand away from the continuation of the two mandibles, and let the distance of the whole incision be the size of three joined fingers; and have a piece of sponge prepared for you, or many dry cloths, with which you dry the blood.
Then introduce a speculum with two pointed ends, whose following form is soon: From the incision which is from the side of the temple, up to the second incision; and scrape out with it all the skin which is between the two incisions, with a knife, which is above the mouth. Then do that also from the middle incision up to the second incision. Then extract this speculum, and introduce into the first incision again another instrument, which is called a sharp curette, blunt on one side and not sharp on the other. And this is its form.
And place its sharp side towards the attached flesh with the skin, and its blunt side towards the opening; and press it until it reaches the middle fissure; and cut off with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes; except that the incision should continue up to what appears from the skin.
Then make that in the middle fissure up to another fissure.
And after an equal quantity runs out from the blood, press out the places from clotted blood fragments.
Then place in every fissure a pledget of old baked cotton, and put on them poultices soaked in wine, oil, or vinegar. And see that hot abscess does not occur.
And on the third day dissolve the ligature, and administer a large infusion with warm water. Then care for it with oil of roses, and the rest by which wounds are healed: until it is healed.
Chapter Five.
Concerning the treatment of sharp tears and cataracts in the eyes from within the head.
When sharp, severe, persistent cataracts happen to someone; and you see his eyes weakened, small, and their appearance already debilitated; and the eyelids ulcerated, and hairs fall from them, and there is a sharp, painful pain deep in the head, and consequent sneezing: then take from these occurrences, that those matters, and cataracts do not come, except from many veins.
And the better cure for them is this. And it is, that you order the sick person to shave his forehead. Then make one incision in the middle of his forehead, or another a little further over by its width; and begin with the incision from the left temple to the right temple; and let the incision be up to the bone; and extend your hand away from the muscles of the temples, which move at mastication: until when the bone is revealed; and you will dry all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate between the two lips of the fissure with an old knife blade or with linen threads. Then bind over it with lint; and moisten the lint with wine and oil so that a hot abscess may not occur.
And when you loosen it and see that the hot abscess has already subsided; then it is necessary that you cauterize the mouth until flesh begins to grow there.
Then treat it with a drying regimen that promotes the growth of flesh; such as if you take two parts from wheat flour and four parts from colophony; and prepare a plaster from them, and apply it to the birth of flesh in these wounds.
Chapter Six.
On the treatment of that which falls into the Ear.
Everything that falls into the ear is one of four kinds: either a mineral stone or something similar to a stone, such as iron and glass; or it is from a plant, such as chickpeas and beans; or it is a flowing thing, such as water and vinegar, and things like them; or some animal.
Therefore, when a stone or a kind of stone falls into the ear from those which are not added to and do not grow in the ear, expose the ear to the sun; if you then see the stone, then distill something into the ear from oil of violets or oil of sesame. Then perform its extraction and make it sneeze with a powder, and plug the nostrils upon the approach of sneezing, after you place around the ear wads from cloth or wool, and extend the ear upward.
Very often it comes out with this treatment.
But if it does not come out, then perform its extraction with a Gestis, that is, fine Pizigaroli; whose shape is this.
If therefore it comes out with the Gestis, it is good.
And if not, then perform its extraction with a thin blind hook of few windings.
If therefore it does not come out through that, then make a tube out of metal and insert the end of the tube into the ear opening far in, and seal what is around the tube with softened wax mixed with oil so that there is no way for air except through the tube: then draw it out with your own strong suction.
Very often indeed it comes out with what we have described. But if it does not come out this way: then take a small amount from hellebore, or from birdlime, that is, prepared gluten with which birds are caught; and put it on the end of the probe after you have wrapped upon it a bandage decently placed: then insert it into the ear opening with ease, after you have dried the ear from moisture.
If therefore it does not come out with all that we have described, then hurry to cutting, before a hot abscess or spasm occurs.
And the manner of incision is, that the phlebotomist should first make a small cut on the head: and draw out blood from him according to his strength. Then make the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear near his fat in a hollow place: and let the incision be moon-shaped until you reach the stone; then remove it with what is possible for you from the instruments.
Then sew up the incision immediately with speed and take care of it until it heals.
But if the thing falling into the ear is from one of the grains which grow and swell: then apply its extraction.
But if it does not yield to your exit, then take a thin, subtle spatula according to this form.
And apply it with an incision of that type from the grains which fall into the ear and do not do this when you think that grain has already been moistened by vapor from the ear until you put many splinters on it: then draw them out with hooks or with a subtle instrument, or with suction as we said for its extraction is alleviated.
For the water which enters the ear, it is necessary that a weak person should use sneezing when it is first placed: and now he has filled his ear with some old cotton; and he is lying upon that ear, in which there is water. Therefore if it goes out through that, it is good.
And if not: then take many stones, according to the length of a finger, thin, smooth, and heat them with fire for a little while, and let the weak person insert one of them into the hole of his ear: and he should jump on one of his feet from that side, and strike with another stone upon the stone which is in the ear. Therefore let him not cease to do this with stone and stone until all the water comes out.
And now the water comes out so that you can take one from a tinderbox or from a reed and insert one end of it into his ear; and ignite the other end with fire until most of it is burned. Then repeat with another reed and do this many times until all the water comes out; and extract it with a tube as was previously stated for a stone.
But in the extraction of an animal entering into it, if it is small-bodied, like a flea, and the like, take care of it as I said in the division.
But if it is large-bodied and appears to the senses; then administer its extraction with gestures and hooks; and its matter is easier for all that are held in the ear.
But in the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you care for it with that which we said in the division and in the treatise on distillations, and your treatment does not succeed; then it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sun. Therefore if something from the worms appears there, then extract it with gestures or with fine hooks.
If nothing appears there, then take a cannula, which has this shape, narrow below, wide above; and introduce the slender extremity into the ear according to the amount that the weak person can tolerate: then suck with it strongly. Do that many times until all the worms come out.
But if they do not obey you to come out, then wrap the cannula's circumference with wax, as I said regarding the stone.
But if they do not come out with what we have said, then administer the distillations which the ancients have already experienced in the destruction of worms, and you will find it in the treatise on distillations.
And let your infusion with which you pour oils and medicines into the ear be with this instrument, of which the form is depicted here. As you see, make it yourself from silver or bronze, narrow below, in which there should be a small hole, wide above.
Therefore let what is in the cavity of the cannula, be made of bronze appropriately. And if you wish, take a ray and wrap its extremity with cotton in a decent winding: then pour oil or juice or what you wish from these medicines into the cannula, and let the cannula be in the ear; then introduce the ray with the cotton on top and press it with your hand in a moderate compression until the oil is driven into the cavity of the hearing and the weak person feels it inside: and what is poured into the ear should already be warmed a little with fire: and beware that nothing which is distilled into it is very cold: for medicines do not tolerate it.
Chapter VII.
Concerning the care of accidental hair removal from the Ear.
Sometimes certain infants emerge from their mothers' wombs unperforated.
And it also sometimes happens that hair removal occurs in the ear canal from a wound or flesh born there.
And this incision is sometimes made deep within the hole of the ear, which does not follow sight; and sometimes it occurs near the outer hole a little, and it follows sight.
That which occurs deep within the ear, and which sight does not grasp, is difficult to heal in many conditions.
And in that which sight follows, it is necessary that you place the sick person's ear in the sun, and look at it: then if you see an apparent incision, open it with a subtle speculum, whose form is as follows, let its extremity be in which there is a small width, of which a part is sharp; and let the remaining speculum be of two smooth sides: so that it does not injure the ear.
But if the incision is flesh-born in the ear canal: then hold it with a subtle hook, and cut into it with vehement ease, until all the flesh is removed.
But if the incision is deep within the ear: then take a subtle, gentle ray, and warm it slightly with fire; then send it into the ear canal.
If therefore you feel the incision with it, which the sick person finds with difficulty of hearing, try to open it with ease; and be careful not to wound the nerves of the ear.
Then place a licorice stick in the ear according to the quantity of the amplitude of the hole, which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; do this for several days, until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound.
Or take licorice, and infuse it in rose water, and sprinkle ground zig over it, and use that.
But if you see the ear already inflamed: then it is necessary that you remove the licorice, and allow it with another licorice, which you wrap in cerate made with rose oil, until the hot inflammation subsides; then care for it until it heals.
If blood flow should occur, then immerse a sponge or cloths in cold water and place them on the ear; and use the remaining treatment which separates the blood flow as described in the treatise on distillations.
On the Treatment of Cataracts.
Chapter Eight.
These cataracts which occur in the eyelids are sometimes humid and sometimes dry.
Therefore it is necessary to hold them with tweezers or with a hook and to cut into them at their roots with a scalpel. Then place pounded zedoary on the spots.
But if blood should flow from them, then cauterize them with a fine lentil-shaped cautery.
And to cauterize them is better after the incision. For very often they return when something remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and they do not return.
On the Treatment of Granules of the Eyelids.
Chapter Nine.
Very often something occurs in the eyelids which resembles a grain in its firmness and hardness, and on account of this it is called a Granule; it is an aggregation of thick moisture in the upper eyelid and the lower eyelid.
Therefore the operation on them is to consider then if it is a Granule proceeding from within, which appears from the eyelid and moves in all directions and its matter is easy.
Then make an incision over it across its width. Then scrape it away from all sides with ease until it comes out. Then suspend it with a hook and cut it off.
But if the incision does not prepare for you its separation unless after you penetrate the eyelid with a slight incision, then it harms the weak person somewhat.
If the fissure is large: then bring it together with suture; and treat it until it heals.
And if it is small, no harm will come to you from it. For ointment restores it and makes it flesh.
And if the hailstone is sloping towards the inner parts of the ear towards the inner surface, then invert the eyelid and suspend the hailstone with a hook: besides which you will need an incision, and press it from every side.
If the eyelid is lengthened by the incision, it does not harm anything.
Then bathe the eye after the incision of the hailstone with salt water and treat the place with that which makes flesh until it heals.
Concerning the care of the eyelids.
Chapter Ten.
Axirnath is a fat which generates in the coats of the upper eyelid and it most often happens to children. It weighs down their eyes and they get catarrhs in the mornings and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears rush to them, and therefore you see them lying on their faces always and sleeping on them and their eyelids are wet under their eyebrows, which has already been covered by inflation and the eminence of Axirnath is visible to the eye and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel the Axirnath between them.
And the manner of its operation is that he who has it should put his head in your lap.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare lye in it and make from that lye a circle according to the amount which contains the Axirnath on every side. Then put it on top of it and press with your fingers from every side so that the Axirnath gathers in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle of that moisture with a scalpel making incisions across its breadth and let there not be an incision larger than that which is made in phlebotomy in depth.
Either you must cut through the whole skin until you reach the Axirnath, for in many dispositions it arises from a fissure according to the shape of a white fat wedge.
Therefore extract it with the cloth which you inserted between your fingers to the outside, and you will turn your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed; and beware lest you add anything in the fissure so that you do not reach the eye with the spatula and injure it.
But if the Axirnath does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, you will add a little into the fissure with ease until the Axirnath proceeds. Then extract it as we said.
Then soak cloths in vinegar and water and place them over the area and compress it with bandages.
And there are people who rub salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure so that it liquefies what remains from that moisture.
Then care for it until it is healed.
But if a hot abscess should happen in the place, then treat it with soothing plasters until it is healed.
Concerning the ways of treating Ataxmir of the eye, that is, when the eyelid softens and it becomes wrinkled as it should not.
Chapter XI.
When hairs in addition to the course of natural hairs are born on the eyelids and become inflamed, then they harm the eye and cause illnesses such as constant tears, softening of the eyelids, and white spots until it becomes a cause for destruction of the eye.
And indeed, Ataxmir of the eye is treated according to four methods. Either by cautery with fire. Or with a sharp medicine, according to what was previously stated in the chapter on cautery. Or Ataxmir is treated by incision and suture. Or through reeds, as I shall say.
You must place the head of the sick person in your lap. Then turn back the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If then it is turned back, it is good. And if not, introduce a needle into that part of it where the thread is located from the lower part of the eyelid and make the needle with the thread penetrate from above, and let it be near the hairs themselves, that is, near the edge of the eyelid in which they are born; and draw the thread upwards together with the eyelid and turn it back with a rod.
Then find in the inner part of the eyelid below the added hairs with a speculum inserted from the greater lacrimal duct to the lesser lacrimal duct.
Then extract the thread and place under the eyelid a small ball of cotton or cloth; then mark on the eyelid with an unguent, which is like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
However it is necessary that the figure be made according to the quantity and elevation of the eyelid; because it now varies among men.
For some of them need a large amount to be cut from the eyelid according to the amount which is softened by the eyelid.
Then with a speculum find above the two lines which you have marked and begin from the greater lacrimal duct to the lesser lacrimal duct, and let there be one fissure near the natural hairs, as is the thickness of a rod.
Then introduce a hook into one of the two angles of the skin. Then flay the entire thing itself. Then join the two lips together with a needle and fine woolen thread; and cleanse the blood, and make what overflows from the threads adhere to the two eyebrows, with certain invisible things if you wish to do it; and if not, do not care.
Then let the suture and threads remain for three or four days; afterwards care for it.
And if you wish, let the wound be without suture and care for it with that which dries and constricts. For the eyelid is raised at the sealing of the wound and its gathering; but it will be better in the future.
This method of healing ancient teachers have taught.
Truly there is anxiety about the sick person and it is from good practice and there is no fear in it.
And another method is in Ataxmir also: and it is, to make a sign on the eyelid in the shape of a myrtle leaf, as we have narrated.
Then raise the eyelid with three hooks separate or joined, according to this following form; then cut off what is superfluous with small forceps, according to this form, with equality of incision.
But if it is not possible for you to hold the hook and it does not equal it; then take a needle in which there is thread and insert it into the middle of the figure; and insert another thread near the larger tear duct and a second thread near the smaller tear duct; and join the threads between your fingers with equality.
Then raise your hand with equal elevation; and raise the skin above which is the marked spot as we have narrated.
Then join the two lips of the wound with suture and care for it until it heals.
But if an abscess should occur at your incision or fissure: soothe the abscess with cerate and things like it from soothing ointments.
And sometimes it happens to the eyelids also that their hairs are turned.
Therefore, you ought to use what we have said in the incision; but the suture for both is more skillful. On the care of Ataxmir with dogs
And it is, that you turn back the eyelid and split the fissure which is inside, according to what I have said. Then artfully make two reeds, or two slender sticks, the length of which shall be according to the length of the eyelid, and their width less than the width of a spatula; and you have already incised at the extremities of each on both sides where you hold the threads.
Then carefully place both upon that which overflows from the eyelid of the eye, and tighten the two reeds on both sides with a strong constriction, and leave it for several days. For the tightened skin will die, darken, and rot until it falls off by itself.
If however it is delayed, then cut it with forceps. Then care for it until it heals.
When therefore it firms up, the eyelid is raised: and the hairs do not sting.
And this is the form of the two reeds, which you will make according to this figure and quantity in length and width.
Chapter XII.
On raising stinging hairs in the eye with a needle.
The operation on this is, that you take a fine needle and insert into it a fine, soft silken thread. Then gather its ends and tie both firmly with a delicate knot; and let the length of the threads be one palm.
Then place another fine thread briefly underneath it in the Alinxotati, and tie its ends if you wish.
Then let the patient place his head in your lap and be near the sun so that the operation may be illuminated; for it is a delicate or minute operation.
Then insert the needle with the Alinxotati into the root of the eyelid and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly until you draw out the natural hair from above.
Then draw the hair up above the ligature; and insert into the ligature that hair: if there is one, or two, or three, no more.
Then draw your hand with it until the hair comes out with the ligature into the eyelid with a natural hair.
But if the ligature is drawn and the hair does not come out with it: you draw the ligature down, with the thread which you have put into it, until the ligature comes out of the upper hole, and you see it with your eye; then indeed you draw the ligature and the thread; and extract both, and close the eye; and leave it closed for two days, or three, until the hair adheres to its place, and flesh grows over it.
But if the hair is short, then either join to it a long hair from the natural hairs, and elevate it with it; or leave it alone until it lengthens after a time, and then raise it.
Chapter XIII.
When this alxatrati happens to the eye, it is called leporine.
And this alxatrati is either natural or accidental.
Accidental therefore arises from the consolidation of a wound, or incision, or cautery, and similar things to those.
And the method of operation on it is that you open that consolidation, and separate its lips, and place in it a ligature from linen, and tie it until it heals.
And it is not necessary for you to use things in its treatment which dry and constrict: for if you do that, the alxatrati returns worse than it was; rather use on it things which soften, such as fenugreek; and embrocate with water in which marsh mallow has been cooked, flax seed: and an unguent called dyaquilon, which has been liquefied with some oil; and wrap it with a ligature, and care for it.
And the treasure of your healing is to try with all your ingenuity that it does not solidify according to the form which it had at first.
And this operation which we have said is nothing but a certain rectification of the Alxatrati so that the form of the place does not return according to what it was at all.
Concerning the treatment of Alxatrati which occurs in the lower eyelid and is a wrinkle or contraction upwards to the right and left.
Chapter Fourteen.
This Alxatrati which occurs below is that which is truly called Alxatrati. And it is natural and accidental.
And the accidental kind arises from a wound, or fissure, or cautery, and things similar to these.
And the way of operating on it is to take a needle with a double thread and stain it with flesh color and make it penetrate from the left tear duct to the right tear duct until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh upward with the needle and cut it with a broad spatula. If therefore the shape of the eyelid returns as it should be, it is good.
And if it does not [return as it should], take a ray and place it in the fissure and turn it with the eyelid; and make two fissures on the inner side of the eyelid, and let the ends of the two fissures be from the two angles of the incision, until they meet and an angle is made from them: so that when they are joined, their shape becomes this shape, which is the letter lambda in Greek.
Then remove that flesh by an amount equal to its lower sharp side from that which follows the eyelid. Then join the separate parts, or sew them with wool thread.
Then treat them with what we have said about softening medicines and those that are clean until they are healed.
And if a luxation should occur from a fissure, and suture or cautery: then it is necessary that you split the fissure flat beneath the eyelashes, even according to what preceded. Then separate between the two lips with lint, according to what we said.
And the sum of the discourse on the care of luxation, when it is above or below, is that the operation should run in it, according to what is prepared from the form of the luxation.
For it itself is of many varieties in form; and a prudent craftsman prepares his ingenuity with whatever way is possible for him, until he may return the figure to its natural form, or near it, and he himself infirm, according to what suits him from the operation and instruments in many arrangements.
Chapter Fifteen.
Concerning the adhesion of the eyelid of the eye with the conjunctiva or cornea.
Sometimes this consolidation happens to many people, so that the upper eyelid consolidates with the white of the eye and prevents it from its natural operations.
Therefore it is necessary that you insert the extremity of a radius under the eyelid and elevate it upwards; or extend it with a hook: then incise the adhesion with a fine spatula, which should not be with the sharpness of an incision of spatulas, but rather be somewhat blunt: so that the infirm person is not disturbed at the operation, and the spatula is removed and injures the eye with its sharpness: and let your incision be as if you were scraping away that adhesion with ease, until when the eyelid returns according to its natural form, and the entire adhesion is healed.
Then pour salt water into the eye, with blue water itself; or distill into it from a sieve made, from ziniar dissolved with water.
Then separate between the eyelid and eye with lint of flax; and place wool imbued with egg white on the eye; and after the third day use a sieve, and with dressings, until it is healed.
On the cutting of the nail and the prominence of the flesh of tears.
Chapter Sixteen.
Know that the nail is according to two manners. Either it is nervous, and it is similar to a hard, thin thread. Or it is not nervous, similar to white frozen moisture; which when it touches iron, or you try to take it with a hook, is cut off, and the hook does not stick in it.
And both species do not begin except from the larger lacrimal duct, until it proceeds gradually, until it covers the sight, and prevents light and the movement of the eye.
And the method of operation in its cutting is: that the sick person should place his head in your lap. Then open his eyes, and lift his eyelid with your hand. Then collect the nail with a hook of few twirls, and extend it upwards. Then take a needle, and insert into it a hair from the hairs of a horse, ox, or cow; and let the thread be strong, and double the extremity of the needle a little, and fix it in the middle of the nail; and pierce it with the needle, and bind the nail with thread, and extend it upwards; and flay the side of the nail which follows the pupil with the hair as if you were to press it with the hair up to its last part.
Then cut the remainder at the root of the lacrimal with a fine scalpel, or with small forceps; and let the natural lacrimal flesh be released so that a constant flow of tears does not occur from its incision.
And sometimes the nail is extended with a hook alone; or with thread as we have said. Then flay it with a gentle scalpel, which has this form.
And beware that the scalpel does not touch the corneal tunic, and a rupture occurs in it, and the pupil is perforated.
Then after the incision, throw into the eye something ground salt, or made from alum, and let it remain until the next day. Then care for it with what is necessary until it heals.
But if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert a point into it nor does a hook catch in it, then this type of nail is often cured with medicines and heals as I have described in the division.
But if you wish to cut it, then open the eye of the infirm person and take a delicate spatula, soft, weak in sharpness, according to this form. And scrape the nail from above with subtlety. But if you see that it thins and breaks, and the scraper presses into it, then distill from your hour into the eye alum made water, or red alum water, or ground salt: and bind the eye until the next day.
Then repeat the operation over it until all of it is removed. Unless there is a hot abscess in your eye: then let it alone and care for the abscess until it heals.
Then repeat the operation over it with a scraper until it heals.
But if the prominence of the tear duct causes great harm to the eye, suspend it with a hook and cut out a portion of it; and do not finish the incision so that the course of tears does not happen.
Then still red alum water or water made from alum into the tear duct until it heals.
Of the incision of a foreign body and flesh born in the eye.
Chapter Seventeen.
Sometimes red flesh grows in the eyes of men, composed or superimposed, until it covers the pupil or approaches and presses upon the eyelids and perhaps turns the eyelids outward; and it is likened to a rose baluster.
And the operation on it is also that the sick person puts his head on your lap. Then open his eyes, and gather all that flesh with suitable hooks: and hold it with one forceps, or hand.
Then cut the flesh first, until all of it is finished with a scalpel. And be careful from the eye, so that you do not injure it during the operation: and let your incision be as you cut it, either with a scalpel, which we have described in the incision of the nail; or with small forceps, with which the asebel is collected, according to its shape after this chapter.
When therefore your incision is complete, and all the chalazion is removed, then fill the eye with crushed salt; or distill into it red powder, and the like corrosive medicines from it: and place cotton wool with egg white on the eye outside; so that it is protected from a hot abscess.
But if anything remains from the chalazion, and hot blood dominates you, and you fear a hot abscess: then let go of the eye, and treat it with that which calms the abscess.
Then repeat the operation on it until it is healed.
And do likewise with the added flesh that occurs in the eye from this kind.
However, it is necessary that others treat the cure of all weak eyes from natural or accidental ways by operating with iron: and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that the member can tolerate the operation.
On the Gathering of an Asebel from the Eye.
Chapter XVIII.
Asebels are red veins that are woven over the eye, and prevent vision from its operation: and they weaken the eye with the length of days.
Therefore it is necessary for you first to consider whether the eye in which there is an asebel is strong and there is no sickness in it except for the asebel: then gather its asebel.
And direct the sick person to put their head in your lap.
Then suspend those good ones with one hook, or two according to your discretion; and let the hook be a fine one of double thickness, according to this form, or let there be two hooks joined together in one body, according to this form.
Then gather them carefully with fine forceps and wipe away the blood hour by hour until you see those veins receding from the eye and resolving; and be careful not to injure the eye with the points of the speculum.
Let your operation be in the middle of the day in front of the sun and be very firm in your operation so that you do not strike anything except those veins.
And when you have finished, then distill green vitriol or red into the eye so that its sharpness may corrode what remains from the sebum.
But if it is not possible for you to gather it all in that hour, then plaster the eye with something that soothes the eye's pain and leave it for several days until its pain subsides; and guard against a warm abscess; then repeat the process on it in the same way until it heals.
And this is the form of the forceps.
On the reduction of a nasal polyp.
Chapter 19.
Physicians call a nasal polyp Fistula, which you should treat with a cautery or with an acute burning medicine according to its preceding description.
And if it does not heal then there is no skill in it except to cut above the abscess at its origin and extract all the moisture and pus from it until the opening is exposed.
Therefore when the opening is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then excise it with an instrument of this form.
And it is called Asperi Capitis.
Let it be made of iron indo, and let its head be round like an azir, which should be punctuated with a file punctuation, or a subtle aliskilfer punctuation; and place it upon the corrupted place of the bone.
Then revolve it between your fingers, and press your hand upon it a little while, until you know that the corruption is already smooth; and do this several times.
Then restore the place with drying astringent medicines.
And if the place is consolidated and flesh arises therein, and the course of blood is cut off; and it remains for forty days, and is not renewed, nor does it fester, nor does any accident happen to it: then you will know that it is already healed.
And if not, there is no skill therein except to reduce the fistula to the nostril foramen, according to this manner.
And it is, that you expose the second bone with iron, or with a sharp medicine; and when the bone has been exposed, then take an auger according to this manner, let its iron end be triangular; and let its wood be a pyramid tapered down to the extremity, as you see.
Then place it upon the bone itself; and let it be near the lacrimal; and extend your hand a little from the eye. Then revolve your hand with the auger until it penetrates the bone and feels weak; by this it finds wind escaping from it when holding his hand over his nose.
Therefore then restore the place with astringent drying medicines, as I taught you.
When flesh therefore arises, and the place hardens: then the material which was pouring out to the exterior returns to the nose; it is therefore lighter upon the weak one.
On the Reduction of an Eye Eminence.
Chapter XX.
When an eye protrudes with its totality and neither harm nor diminution occurs to the vision; then it is necessary that you loosen the weak one; then phlebotomize him; afterwards apply cupping glasses to the neck without scarification but with suction.
Then place upon the eye a liniment which is made from acacia, aloe, olibanum, and sarcocol. Then bind the eye above with a plaster and many poultices.
And the manner of the poultices is: that you should take many soft cloths and double each cloth from them four times; make many from them; then place them one upon another, according to the quantity which the eye needs; then bind over them with a hard cloth a strong binding.
And repeat cuppings with suction without scarification.
Then remove the cuppings and let the eye remain bound day and night.
But if the bandage again becomes loosened, then it is necessary that it should be bound tightly; then remove the bandage after a day and a night, as we have said.
Therefore if you see the eye has already returned to its former tunic, it is good; and if not, then repeat the plaster, poultices, binding, and cuppings until it heals.
Concerning the incision of the tunics.
Chapter XXI.
When a rupture occurs in the tunic of the eye, and then it protrudes and proceeds beyond the eyelids like a grain of the eye, and disfigures the form of man because of it, and you wish to excise it; then the operation on this is as I shall relate: it is to insert a needle into the root of the eye from the lower to the upper part.
Then insert another needle into which is a double thread from the lacrimal part and make it penetrate; and let the first needle go according to its own disposition.
Then cut the place of the double thread and tie it with the part of the eye around the needle; and bind it tightly.
Then extract the needle and place upon the eye wool soaked in egg white; and let it remain until the thread falls with the eye.
Then care for the eye with that which strengthens it until the wound is healed.
And sometimes it is bound by a circle of cloth from all sides, until the eye adds great prominence.
Then pierce it with a fine speculum, which reaches the depth of the eye, and let the white humidity flow, and let the eye descend, and enter immediately; then bind it until it is healed.
On the treatment of Alconati.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
This ailment which is called Alconati is nothing but blood which gathers in the eye, similar to descending water, and it is not itself.
And the method of operation on it is that you make the weak person sit upon a prepared seat, or upright.
Then take his head with your hands on both sides and move it until you see the blood arrive at the lower parts of your eyes. Then fix it so that it does not descend and illuminate the light; and let the weak person see things as he used to see; and if it does not descend below, you know that it is water.
But if the descent of the blood is not prepared with what we said, then make the weak person sit between your hands. Then take a fine speculum and pierce with it above the corneal membrane a little at the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tunic in the crown until the blood comes out.
Therefore, when it comes out, then distill into the eye warm water in which you have mixed honey; or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey; then care for it with the remaining treatment until it is healed.
On the treatment of water, which descends in the eye, or cataract.
Chapter Twenty-Three.
We have already said the kinds of water in division, and which is suitable for piercing by speech declaring and explaining, then take that same one according to health.
Then it is necessary that you make the weak person sit square between your hands, opposite the light, near the sun; and bind his sound eye, and constrict it strongly; then draw down the eyelid of his eye with your right hand, if the eye in which there is water is the left eye; or with your left hand, if the eye is the right one.
Then take the lancet in your right hand, if the eye is the left one; or in your left hand, if the eye is the right one.
Then place the point of the lancet near the cornea for the width of a radius in the very whiteness of the eye, appearing near the lesser lacrimal; then thrust the lancet with force; and you will revolve your hand with it until it penetrates into the albuginea of the eye; and feel that the lancet has now reached the empty thing.
And it is necessary that the measure of the lancet's journey to its depth be the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of blackness; and this is the cornea of the eye. For you will see these things in the very pupil by the vision of the eye, because of the clarity of the corneal tunic.
Then place the lancet up to the place where the water is. Then press it down below with force, one after another.
If therefore the water descends immediately, then the weak person sees that upon which he opens his sight immediately, and the lancet in his eye.
Then rest a little while. If therefore the water descends, then deposit it a second time, beyond which the lancet goes out.
When therefore it is fixed and does not ascend; then extract the lancet easily; and you will revolve your hand gradually.
Then dissolve something of clear rock salt in water; and wash the eye within it. Then place a whole cotton pad, or wool soaked in rose oil and albumen, outside the eye; and bind it with the sound eye.
We, and those of our time, place ground cumin with egg white over it.
But if the almond does not yield to entry into the eye because of its hardness, since it is from a man whose eye is very hard: then you must take a speculum called an Alberid, which has this form.
Therefore pierce only the conjunctiva with it and do not insert your hand into the opening: and it is only so that you may make a way to the almond's place, which is narrow.
Then introduce the almond as we said.
And when your work is complete, prepare a well-made bedchamber for the weak one in which he may sleep on his back in a dark house; and prohibit him from all movements and coughing; and give him food which soothes his nature; and let him not move his head to the right nor to the left at all.
Let the bandage remain according to its arrangement until the third day.
Then loosen it in that dark house and make him try his sight; and have him look at things. Then replace the bandage until the seventh day.
And it is not necessary that he do this during the hour of healing or immediately after the incision; rather, let others do it because water rises quickly through a violent gaze.
But if a hot swelling occurs then you must loosen the eye before the seventh day and correct it with that which soothes the swelling until it is soothed; then release his sight and place an oral remedy on his face by which his vision is regulated for several days, he himself being in that dark house.
Then let him gradually leave the house and engage in his usual activities.
And know that a disciple is not excused from vision several times in surgery; then let him dare to perform the operation.
And indeed, there has come to us a certain one from those who are of Al-Ayraq, who said that it was done in Al-Ayraq a perforated well, by which water is drawn up.
But therefore I have not seen anyone in your land who has done that, nor have I read it in any of the ancient books, and it is possible that it is new.
And these are the forms of species from a well, so that it stands upon it who does not know them.
Let them be made of bronze properly: and let their ends be with the same delicate triangularity, and pointed end.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of flesh born in the nose.
Sometimes there are born in the nose various added fleshes, from which there is something that resembles a scorpion of many feet: and from it is cancerous flesh, stony, of a dark color: and from it is that which is soft flesh, not of a dark color.
Therefore, in that which is soft flesh from these fleshes, not deceitful nor cancerous, it is necessary for you to make the infirm person sit between your hands opposite the sun, and open their nostrils, and project a hook into those fleshes: then draw them outward, and cut what you have grasped from them with a thin sharp scalpel on one side, until you know that all the flesh has now been removed.
And if something remained from it of which incision is not possible: then scrape that with one of the subtle instruments easily, until nothing remains from it. But if blood dominates you, or a hot abscess occurs: then oppose it by what is necessary: or if it is from malignant abscesses, then hurry to cauterize it until the blood is severed and all the flesh is removed.
Then vinegar, and water, or wine should be projected into the nose after the incision. But if the nose is opened and moisture proceeds from it as far as the palate, then you know that it is already healthy.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that there is flesh grown inside it upon the upper bones of the nose, to which the instrument did not reach with the incision.
Then it is necessary that you introduce a linen thread which has some thickness, and knots in it many knots; and place between each knot the quantity of a finger, or less: and contrive, so that it sends one end of the thread into the nose with a rod, or with whatever is possible for him after he has made it like a razor; and draw out his odor, until it reaches as far as the palate, and emerges over his throat.
And indeed very often they do something like this to children in schools; and it is an easy thing for him who wants to do it.
Then place the two ends of the thread, the one end which emerges over the nose and the other which remains inside the nose. Then apply a flesh clamp with the knots that are on the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh is already held with the knots of the thread.
Then draw out the thread and after removing the blood put a linen cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment into the nose; do this for three days, or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the flesh.
Finally, at the end of the procedure, put a lead tube into the nose for several days until it heals.
But if it needs drying treatment, use that.
To make a nasal douche, with which oils and other medicines are distilled into the nose, make it from silver or bronze; which is like a small lamp, open like a shell; and its passageway similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed tube, like a reed.
And the bowl of the instrument for making a head bandage should be full and open, with a handle at its end by which you hold it when heating oil or whatever juice or fluid substances you wish in it.
Chapter Twenty-Five.
Very often a break occurs at the end of the nose, and it swells and increases with each day until its appearance is ugly.
And for this reason it is necessary that you cut into it at the beginning of its appearance and remove all of it. Then place upon the spot either a cautery or a burning medication which will stay in its place.
But if the incision is delayed until it swells, then consider if it is stony, hard, of a dark color, and has little sensation: then do not touch it with iron because it is a cancerous ulcer.
For I have often seen those who cut into such an ulcer and great harm befalls him who has it.
And if the ulcer is soft to the touch, not dark in color, and you see that incision is possible throughout its entirety, then empty the weak spot and cut into it without fear or hesitation: and treat the area with something which dries and constricts it until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Six.
On the suturing of the nose, lip, and ear.
Know that when a break occurs in the continuity of one of these cartilages, surgery makes little difference in it unless in certain people.
Therefore when this happens to someone, consider if it is a fresh wound with its own blood: and then join the two lips of the wound with sutures; then treat it until it heals.
And if the lips of the break are already separated and each part has become healthy, then you must scrape away all the skin from its apparent surface until it bleeds. Then join two lips with suture, and tighten them, and sprinkle dragon's blood and ground frankincense upon it; and place a piece of diaphycon plaster, and one from another of the consolidating plasters, above the powders; and let it be tied for two days, or three. Then untie it, and change the medicine; and let it be so until the threads are cut off by themselves. Then care for it with ointment, until it is healed.
The method of suture, however, is to join the solution of continuity either with needles, as we have described in the suturing of the abdomen; or join the solution with thread, as I made you know.
Chapter XXVII.
On the Extraction of Nodes of the Lips.
Many men indeed have hard boils, similar to grains of herbs, occurring mostly in the inner parts of their lips; and some of these are smaller, and others larger.
Therefore it is necessary that you turn the lip, and cut over all of its node, and suspend it with a hook, and incise it from every side.
Then fill the place after the incision with powdered zedoary, until the blood is cut off.
Then wash it with vinegar and care for the place with it, in which there is astringency, until the wounds are healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the Incision of Flesh Born Upon the Gum.
Very often flesh grows upon the gum, which the ancients call abuluss.
Therefore it is necessary that you suspend it with a hook; or hold it with forceps, and incise it at its root, and let the serum run, or blood.
Then place powdered zedoary upon the place, or other astringent, drying powders.
If that flesh returns after healing, for it often does, then cut into it a second time and cauterize it; for it will not return after cautery.
Chapter Twenty-Nine.
On the reason of teeth with iron.
Sometimes rough, ugly crusts gather on the surfaces of teeth from both the inner and outer sides, and sometimes they become darkened, turning yellow or green, until corruption from that reaches the gum, and the teeth become foul through it.
Therefore it is necessary that you make the weak person sit between your hands and their head in your lap, and grind a millstone and tooth, where crusts appear to you like sand, until nothing remains of them, and similarly do so with blackness, greenness, yellowness, and others, until they are cleansed.
Therefore if what is from the beginning of the reason for them is taken away, it is good; and if not, then repeat the reason over them on another day, the second and third, until at last you achieve what you desire.
And know that a tooth needs razors of various shapes and many figures according to how it is prepared for your operation; therefore the razor with which the tooth is scraped from the lower part is different from the razor with which it is scraped between the teeth, according to other shapes.
And these shapes of razors should be prepared by you, as you see.
Chapter Thirty.
On the Extraction of Toothache.
You must care for the tooth from its pain with all your ingenuity and delay in its eradication. For there is no substitute for it when it is eradicated, as it is a noble substance: until when there is no excuse for its eradication, then when the weak person is forced to eradicate it, you must strengthen and assure yourself of the aching tooth.
Very often pain deceives the sick person, and they think it is in a sound tooth and extract it; then the pain does not cease until the diseased tooth is extracted.
For we have already seen that from the operation of phlebotomists.
Therefore when a painful tooth is confirmed with you, it is necessary that you make incisions around the tooth with a scalpel, in which there is some virtue, until the gum is loosened on all sides; then move it with your fingers, or with delicate forceps at first gradually, until you shake it.
Then place large forceps in a good position on it, and the head of the diseased person between your knees: which you have now held well so that it does not move; then pull the tooth according to its straightness so as not to break it.
But if it does not come out, then take one of those instruments and insert it under it from all sides with ease, and try to move it as you did at first.
But if the tooth is perforated or corroded, then you must fill that hole with cloth and tie it with the end of a fine ray, so that it does not break in the hour of your constriction upon it with forceps.
And you must act delicately with the incision all around the gum on every side a great deal.
And keep your strength, so that you do not break it, and a part of it remains, and returns upon the sick person from that greater evil which is his first pain.
And beware, lest you do what ignorant phlebotomists do in their haste and boldness over its eradication, besides administering that which we have narrated.
For they very often cause great infirmities to happen upon men, which are more difficult to break and which leave all or some of its roots remaining; or that they extract it with certain bones of the jawbone: as we have testified many times.
Then let it be washed after its removal with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
And if it should happen that there is a flow of blood from the places (for it often happens), then apply something from wool tow and fill the place with it: and if not, cauterize it if you do not have wool tow.
The shapes of the forceps with which a tooth is moved should first be long-shafted, with a short handle, thick so that they do not double when pressed upon the tooth: let them be as you see with thick handles, so that when you squeeze them, they do not give way or double: with short shafts, and made of good iron or steel, well fashioned, straight-shafted: and on their ends are teeth, some which enter others and constrict with a decent force.
And sometimes the ends are made like the shape of the mouth of a bird which is called a stork, and they are of strong constriction.
Chapter XXXI.
On the removal of teeth, and the extraction of broken jawbones.
When something remains at the removal of a tooth which is broken, then it is necessary that you put upon the place cotton with butter for one or two days until the place softens: then insert into it an algast, or forceps: whose ends are assimilated to the mouth of a bird called a stork. This is the shape of these forceps.
Let their ends be made like a file within, or like a pair of pincers.
But if it does not yield to you towards its removal with these forceps, then it is necessary that you should carve upon the root, and detach all the flesh, and insert an instrument which is called a small Lever, whose shape is this.
Let it be short-shafted, slightly thick: and let it not be imbrued so that it does not break.
Therefore, if the root comes out through that, it is good; and if not, it is necessary to pull with these other instruments whose forms are these.
The shape of the first one is triangular at the end, in which there is a certain thickness.
The shape of the triangular end is slender.
And with other instruments and tools that preceded in the manner of teeth.
Pulling may also be done with this instrument which resembles a large hook, of this shape, with a twisted triangular end, in which there is some thickness so that it does not break; and let it not be soaked.
And know that there are many tooth instruments; and likewise the other instruments are not counted, and a skillful artisan, subtle in his art, finds an instrument for himself according to what the operation and illnesses themselves indicate to him.
For there are illnesses for which the ancients did not mention an instrument because of the diversity of their kinds.
But if the jawbone breaks from the mandible or from other bones of the mouth, or it putrifies: then carefully examine it in its place with what suits it from the instruments and forceps that I have mentioned in the extraction of roots, and pull with a pair of tongs, which has this form.
Let there be a certain gradual thickness in it so that the bone is drawn tight or held with it, and does not flee and wander, until the bone comes out; and restore the place with suitable medicines for that.
But if there is a small putrefaction in the bone, then scrape it from its putrefaction and care for it until it heals.
Chapter Thirty-Two.
Concerning the Lock of Teeth Projecting Above Others.
When teeth project not according to their natural course, it becomes ugly through that; and especially when it happens in women and girls, namely those of marriageable age.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to consider. For if a tooth is born after another tooth and is not placed, or its serration is possible, nor its filing: then eradicate it; and if it is joined with another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, which has this shape.
It is similar to a small beak, and is made of tempered iron, with a very sharp end.
And let your incision be such that you cut it into many days, and on account of the hardness of the tooth, and so that another is not disturbed from the teeth.
But if it is prominent and exposed to its filing, then file it with a file of tempered iron, which has this shape.
Let it be entirely of iron, and its handle of very small points, like a file with which needles are made; with which the tooth is filed gradually over many days with ease, so that the tooth is not disturbed, and falls out; then soften it, and in the end eradicate it with certain razors.
But if there is a tooth from which a part breaks off and injures the tongue, then it is necessary for you to file it even until the roughness of that fracture is removed and it becomes equal; and it is made flat so that it does not injure the tongue nor corrupt speech.
Chapter Thirty-Three.
Concerning the Retention of Teeth with Gold Threads.
When the front teeth suffer a concussion and shock from a blow or fall, and the infirm person cannot bite down on it so that it does not fall out; and you have treated them with astringent medicines, and the cure has not worked; then there is an idea in this, for them to be tied with a gold thread; because silver turns green and rots after days: but gold never changes.
And let the thread be medium in subtlety and thickness according to the amount that it takes between the teeth.
And indeed the manner of retention is to take a thread and insert twice its length between two sound teeth; then you weave with the two ends of the thread among the loose teeth, whether there be one or several, until you reach with the ligature up to a sound tooth on the other side. Then repeat the weaving back to the part from which you began; and tighten your hand with subtlety and wisdom until it is not at all moved; and let your constriction where you bind the thread be at the roots of the teeth so that it does not come loose.
Then cut off the superfluous ends of the thread with forceps; and join both, and turn them over with a gesture; and hide them between a sound tooth and a loose tooth so that it does not injure the tongue; then let it remain thus tightened until it heals.
But if they become loosened or broken, bind them with another thread and it will hold thus for the entire time.
And this is the form of Teeth, and the figure of retention of two sound teeth and two loose teeth as you see.
And sometimes it happens that one or two teeth return to their places after a fall or blow, and are retained as we have described and remain; and this is not done except by a craftsman who is prudent and experienced.
And sometimes a piece of bone is adapted; and it is made into the shape of a tooth, and placed in its place, from which the tooth is fortified and tightened, as we said; and it remains and is used with it for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
Sometimes this ligament which occurs under the tongue is either natural, with which a person is born, or accidental, from a wound that has already healed.
And the operation on it is to open the mouth of the infirm person in your lap and raise their tongue; then cut that nervous ligament across its width until the tongue is freed from its restraint.
If there is something hard and knotted in it, and if that is from the consolidation of the wound, then thrust a hook into it and probe it across its width until you come upon a ligament and loosen the knot.
And be careful that there is no fissure deep in the flesh so that you might cut into an artery and bleeding occur.
Then wash the area of the incision with rose water or vinegar or cold water.
Then place a linen wick under the tongue, which the patient should hold in his mouth all night so that it does not heal again.
But if bleeding occurs, then put powdered eggshells over the area. But if the bleeding overcomes you, then cauterize the place with a lentil-shaped cautery which is suitable for that; and then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter Thirty-Five.
Sometimes an abscess occurs under the tongue which resembles a small frog, preventing the tongue from its natural function; and perhaps it grows so large that it fills the mouth.
And the operation on it is to open the patient's mouth before the sun and examine the abscess.
And if you see it is of a dark or black color, hard, to which the patient does not feel sensation, then do not touch it because it is cancer.
But if it is inclined toward whiteness and contains moisture, then thrust a hook into it and cut it with a fine scalpel and free it from every side. But if bleeding overcomes you during your operation, then put powdered eggshells on it until the bleeding stops; and then return to your operation until you extract it with all of its contents.
Then it should be washed with vinegar and salt; and let it be cared for with other suitable treatment until it is healed.
On the Treatment of an Abscess in Two Tonsils.
Chapter Thirty-Six.
Sometimes swellings occur between the throat and the palate, that is, glands which resemble almonds, and these are called two tonsils; when you treat them with what we said in the division, and they do not heal, then consider.
Therefore if it is a firm abscess, dark in color, with little feeling; then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red in color and its root is thick; then do not touch it even with iron, fearing a flow of blood, but rather let it alone until it matures. And then either pierce it or it will burst on its own.
And if it is white in color, round, and its root is slender; then it is necessary to cut it open.
And the operation on it is such that you should consider before your operation whether its hot abscess has quieted completely with rest or diminishes somewhat; then have the weak person sit facing the sun, and let their head be in your lap; open their mouth, and let a servant hold it between their hands and press their tongue down with an instrument which has this form.
It should be made of silver or bronze, thin like a knife.
Therefore when you press it down with that, and the abscess is shown to you and your sight falls upon it; then take a hook and fix it in the tonsil, and draw it outward as much as you can, except that you pull some of the coats out with it.
Then cut it open with an instrument which has this following form. It resembles forceps; nevertheless its tips should be curved so that the opening of each of them is directly in line with the other sharply; therefore take care that it is made of tempered steel or filled with alum.
If this instrument is not present, then cut it with a scalpel, which has this shape. Let it be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other.
And after you cut one amygdala, cut the other according to this same kind of incision.
Then after the incision, let the patient gargle with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
But if a flow of blood should occur, let him gargle with water in which pomegranate rinds have been boiled; or myrtle leaves, and things similar to these astringents, until the flow of blood is stopped; then care for it until it heals.
And sometimes other abscesses arise in the throat besides the two amygdalae. Therefore cut them according to what I said in the cutting of the two amygdalae equally.
And indeed I myself have already treated a woman from an abscess that had arisen between her throat, which was drawing it to choking, with few senses, because it had almost closed the throat; and the woman was breathing for me through a narrow passage, and had already prohibited her from eating and drinking water; and she had already come to death if she had remained for one day or two days.
And the abscess had risen so much that it had sent out two branches until they came out above the two nostrils.
Therefore I hurried quickly and fastened a hook into one of them. Then I pulled it, and a large portion came out from it.
Then I cut it where I grasped it from the nostril.
Then I did that to her which proceeded from the other nostril.
Then I opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; and afterwards I fastened a hook into the abscess itself; then I cut off a portion of it, and there did not flow from it except a little blood; therefore her throat was cleared, and she immediately began to drink water, and then she received food.
Therefore I did not cease to cut from that abscess many times over a long period, and an abscess would succeed in the place where I cut it until it was prolonged too much and with it that.
Therefore I devised and cauterized the abscess between the throat.
It therefore ceased from adding; then I walked away, and I did not know what God did with it after me.
Concerning the cutting of an abscess of the uvula.
Chapter Thirty-Seven.
When a catarrh descends to the uvula and becomes abscessed and is long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the lower part thick, round, then it is called uvula.
When it is treated with what we said in division, and the treatment does not avail; and you see that the hot abscess has ceased from it, and it is subtle; then it is necessary for you to cut into it.
And whatever from it is a rounded mass, and there is no length to it, and it is bloody, or tawny colored, or black, and there is no sensation to it; then it is necessary for you to avoid cutting into it. For in this there is fear over the weak one.
It is therefore necessary when you see it according to the manner which I said from its whiteness and its length, that you make the weak one sit before the sun; and press his tongue with the instrument of which we spoke previously; then fix a hook in the uvula and draw it downwards; and cut into it with one of the two instruments which I said in the cutting of the two tonsils.
And it is necessary that you not cut from it except that which is added above the natural limit without addition.
For if you cut from it more, you injure the voice and speech.
Then after the cutting use what we narrated in the cutting of the two tonsils; and care for it until it heals.
If, however, the patient is terrified of the incision: then it is necessary for you to use skill in cauterizing him without fear or trembling.
And the manner of cautery in this is not done except with sharp water; and it is, that you place the head of the patient in your lap. Then press his tongue with the instrument which we have mentioned. Then take from the water which I told you in the chapter on cautery and mix it with an unquenched lime, and put it neither thick nor thin; and fill the hollow of this instrument, which has this shape.
Let the extremity in which the medicine is placed be a concavity, like the concavity of a snail's shell.
And place the instrument with the medicine upon his tongue; and let the patient lie on his side so that saliva runs from his mouth through the inward medicine, so that nothing descends from it into his throat and harms him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And you from the first place it upon his tongue for half an hour's time until you see it already blackened and the bite of the medicine quieted.
And if you wish to take cotton and wrap it over the extremity of the rod, and infuse the cotton with medicine and insert the rod with the cotton into the cannula from above until the cotton adheres upon the tongue.
Do that many times until you achieve what you desire concerning the cautery of the vein. Then dismiss it; for it will dry up and fall off after three or four days.
And if it is inconvenient for you to repeat the medicine, repeat it; and after cautery wash around the vein with cotton soaked in butter, and cleanse what is around it from the medicine; and gargle with cold water.
And let it be treated externally with embrocations and internally with gargles until it is healed.
Therefore this kind of treatment is healthier by cutting and farther from fear.
And sometimes a wound is healed even with something more subtle than cautery and incision; for it is healed with fumigation, in this way. Take calamint, hyssop, origanum, rue, sage, chamomile, wormwood, and similar herbs; and put them all together, or some of them, in a pot, and submerge them with vinegar, and let them boil; and the pot should be well plastered with clay; and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot, over which an instrument shaped like a bowl is placed.
It should be made of silver or bronze; and the end in which there is a pomegranate seed should be inserted into the sick person's mouth until the vapor rises to the wound above the tube until the wound is darkened greatly.
Then repeat it over the wound many times until it dries up.
And be careful not to do this treatment at the beginning of an abscess's arrival. For it often adds to the abscess; and it is not necessary that you do this unless at the decline of its heat.
But if this instrument is not present to you, then take a reed and place bark on its end so that the sick person's mouth is not burned; for the bark of the reed prevents the vapor from burning the mouth; and this is a good healing with safety.
On the extraction of thorns and bones from the throat.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Often a bone or a fishbone, or something else, sticks in the throat.
Therefore it is necessary that you extract what appears of them upon which sight falls, after you push the tongue with an instrument toward the sun, and it is shown to you what is in the throat.
And what does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you cause the sick person's stomach to be empty before food is digested in the stomach. Perhaps indeed it may exit by vomiting.
Or the weak one may swallow a piece of turnip, or a lettuce root, or swallow a morsel of dry bread; or take a piece of soft dried sea sponge: and tie it on a thread, then swallow it. Therefore when it reaches the place where the spines or bone are, and is drawn out, then it comes out.
If therefore it does not come out with what we said: then use an instrument made of lead according to this form.
Let it be a little thicker than the radius, and at its extremity let there be a curve, which it may introduce into its throat with ease: and let it have its head raised upwards.
And let him beware of touching his epiglottis, lest he should have a cough, and push with it the mouth, or spine; or the physician may introduce it with his hand.
But what the weak one introduces is better, because of his knowledge of the place where the thing is attached: and he pushes it down, or draws his hand up with the instrument, all of it according to the amount that is prepared for him, until it comes out.
Concerning the Extraction of a Leech.
Chapter XXXIX.
When a leech is medicated with what I said in the division on treatment with medicines, and it does not detach, then consider in the throat of the weak one in front of the sun, or by the sun after you have pressed its tongue with the instrument that I narrated to you.
If therefore your sight falls upon the leech, extract it with a small hook, or with delicate forceps carefully.
But if it is not possible with them: then take a concave tube and introduce it into the throat of the weak one up to near the throat; then introduce into the concavity of the tube iron heated with fire. Do this many times; and let the weak abstain from all water for the whole day.
Then let him take a bowl full of cold water, and open his mouth into it; and moisten his mouth with it, and swallow nothing from it; and stir the water every hour with his hand. For the leech immediately falls when it feels the water.
But if it does not come out with what we have said, then fumigate the weak person with bedbugs, or with incense with the instrument which I have described in the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this many times, for it will fall off itself.
And the manner of operation in fumigation is this: that you take a pot in which there are live plums with fire; and let the pot be covered with a lid, in the middle of which there is an opening; and place in that opening the extremity of the instrument.
Then project the fumigation, and let the weak person place his mouth at the extremity of the tube, and close his mouth so that the fumigation does not go out until you know that the fumigation has already reached the leech. For the leech immediately falls.
But if it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation many times.
And let the weak person endure thirst, and eat salt, and garlic, and not drink water.
It is therefore necessary that it comes out with this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the leech is extracted from the throat when it falls upon the sight.
It is similar to forceps, as you see: except that it has this curvature which is inserted into the throat. And the extremity of it is similar to the beak of a bird which is called a stork, in which there is a roughness like a file; when it grasps something, it does not let go of it at all.
On the opening of Abscesses, and their incision, and treatment in general.
Chapter Forty.
There are many kinds of abscesses, of many types, according to the recollection of them, namely one, and one in this book: and they are diverse in their perforation, and incision itself from two ways.
One of which is from the kind of abscess in itself, and by that which it contains from humors.
And the second way is on account of the places, in which it happens in the body.
For an abscess happening in the head, is different from an abscess happening in the anus: and an abscess happening in a fleshy place, is different from an abscess happening in joints: and each of these has its own judgment from operation.
And from abscesses there are which ought not to be perforated, except after the maturation of blood in them, and its completion: and from these there are, which ought to be perforated while they are raw, and do not mature according to completion.
Such as abscesses which are near joints.
For when an abscess happens near a joint, and is prolonged to be its own, until it putrefies what is around it perhaps the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted: therefore there is a cause for the closer contraction of that limb.
Or there is an abscess at a principal limb: for if you delay its perforation until it matures, it will harm either that or through it the principal limb.
Or it is near the anus, therefore perforate it immature: and it is not necessary that you perforate a raw abscess, not of complete digestion, except that which is near the anus, lest it putrefies deeply, and lengthens to the interiors of the anus, and becomes a fistula, or becomes at its end what does not heal.
It is necessary that you know the hour of perforation of an abscess, which has matured according to completion: and it is at sedation of pain, recession of fever, and diminution of redness, and throbbing, and sharpness of the head of the abscess: and the remaining signs.
And it is necessary that you make the same perforation in the lower place of the abscess, and of the more prominent eminence; and let the perforation be facing in the length of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands and feet, and places of tendons, and cords, and nerves, and arteries, and finally in all equal places where there is no reflex.
But in those that are reflected, go with the perforation according to that limb.
But when an abscess is in fleshy places, then it is better that you leave its perforation until its digestion is confirmed, as we said according to the complement.
For if you perforate it before that, the course of the virus is prolonged from it, and there is much filth and foulness, and perhaps its lips will become hardened, and its depth.
And some abscesses are perforated according to the width of the body when necessary, or according to that which the limb requires.
And it is necessary that you administer a small perforation in small abscesses, and a large perforation in large abscesses, or many incisions according to the likeness of the magnitude of the abscess.
And there are abscesses in which it is necessary that the skin be concave: and it should be incised when it has already been made like cloth, and made at the end, which is already dead: as it happens in many, such as boils, and buboes.
And of these are those which are cut with a section having three angles. And from these is one from which it is incised like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Like an abscess of the groin.
And among these are those in which a round section and a lunar section are administered, and similar ones to these sections.
But that which does not have a head, such as soft and superficial abscesses, it is necessary to perforate it with a superficial perforation, or only flat.
And it is necessary, when the abscess is large, and has already collected much pus, that you pierce it, so that you do not hasten and extract all the pus at that time; rather, extract a part of it from it. Then bind up the abscess until another day. Then extract some of the pus again.
Do this many times according to the progression, until it all comes out; especially if the patient is a weak person, or a pregnant woman, or a young child, or an old man: for the animal spirit is often resolved with the departure of blood from the animal; and perhaps the sick person dies, and you do not perceive it.
Therefore take heed of this chapter with great caution.
And after your piercing, by which you pierce these abscesses, it is necessary that you wash the wound; and consider. If therefore the wound of the abscess is small, or there is a flat incision, then apply a linen bandage, or an old tunic. And if the abscess is large, and there are many fissures of the perforation, it is necessary then that you insert linen into every fissure until they reach each other.
And if you have cut off a part of the skin in the abscess, or have hollowed it out around it; then it is necessary that you fill it with an old tunic, or as when cloth is woven, or shorn of linen fluff without moisture; and bind it up until the third day.
Then remove it, and care for it with what is necessary from ointment, until it heals.
But if bleeding occurs during your operation, then apply cold water, and vinegar, after a cloth has been soaked in them; and place it upon the place of bleeding many times.
But if the bleeding persists, then it is necessary that you administer regimen, and treatment, and powders which I have described in many places of this our book, and by division.
If it is in the winter time, and the place of the abscess is full of many nerves; then it is necessary that you pour warm broth with wine and oil on it, and place them over the area.
And if it is in the summer time, and the places are fleshy; then it is necessary that you place broth soaked in water and oil, or wine and oil, and all of that cold. Until when it will be the third day, as we said, then it is necessary that you open the abscess and clean it, and minister to its cure what suits it, until it heals.
This is therefore what is necessary from the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally.
According to the path of distinction, I have now spoken of every abscess, how its way to cure is taken chapter by chapter individually.
Chapter 41.
On the incision of abscesses which occur in the skin of the head.
Small abscesses occur in the skin of the head, and they are of a kind of nodules, which contain sheaths, which are sacs to them: as if they themselves were like milked hens.
And their kinds are many.
Of these, some are fatty; and of these, some contain moisture like slime; and of these, some contain moisture like whey and gruel; and those similar to them; and of these, some are hard and stony.
And in the incision of all, and their extraction there is no fear, as long as an artery does not oppose at the time of their incision.
And the operation in the incision of them is that you try it with an instrument, whose shape will come after this, which is called an Intromissor, until you know what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, then dry it with an incision according to length with a superficial incision; according to this form.
And begin with a section from line b to line g. When therefore the humidity is evacuated, then remove the skin kistin which contains it, and do not leave anything at all within it.
For very often it returns if anything remains in it.
Then immerse the dressing in Egyptian ointment if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill the wound with it and leave it until the next day. For it will corrode what remained from the cyst.
Then repeat upon it a dressing with Egyptian ointment a second time and a third, and if necessary again, until you are confident that nothing remains from the cyst; then treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
But if the abscess contains a fatty node, then dry it according to this form, with a section having the shape of a cross; and insert hooks between the two lips of the section, and remove the skin from every side; and exert your strength in extracting the tunic which contains it.
But if an artery opposes you, then do what I will tell you afterwards.
And do the same in a stony abscess, from the incision and treatment, as we have said.
And the incision upon a stony abscess is easier; because there is little blood and humidity. And sometimes there are certain of these abscesses which are on the head in some people, in which there is absolutely no humidity.
For this is the reason: because I cut upon an abscess on the head of a young woman, and found the abscess like a solid and hard stone, rough, white, which could not be broken; and if one should strike it with something projecting, it would wound it.
But in other abscesses which occur on the head, besides these abscesses which occur on the heads of children and at the roots of ears, the incision of all of them should be superficial.
Or make a perforation in them always from their lower part, so that the course of blood is relieved towards the lower parts.
Then care for it with what suits them from treatment.
On the Section of Scrofulous Swelling in the Neck.
Chapter Forty-Two.
Very often these abscesses occur in the neck, and under the armpits, and groins: and sometimes they occur in the rest of the body.
And concerning those which occur in the neck from them, there are some single, and many: and they are generated from one another: and every scrofula from them is within its own tunic, just as it is in nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have related.
And there are many kinds of these scrofulae. And of them indeed, some are stony: and of them some contain humors; and of them some are malignant, which do not obey treatment.
Therefore in that one which you see of good disposition to the touch, of which it is evident that it is close in color to the skin, and moves in every direction, and is not joined with the nerves of the neck, nor with a sinew, nor with an artery, nor is deep: it is necessary that you cut it with a superficial section from the upper part to the lower part of the body from line b. to line g. and flay it from all sides: and extend two lips of skin with a hook, or with many hooks if it is needed as we said in abscesses of the head, and extract it gradually.
And there is caution to be exercised so that a vein or nerve is not cut into.
And let the scalpel not be very sharp: so that it does not add to your hand with the incision, or disturb the sick person, and you cut what is not necessary.
But if you cut a vein or artery, or something prevents you from the operation, then put on the wound litharge pounded, or some powders which staunch bleeding, and compress the wound, and leave it until the sharpness of the abscess subsides, and the wound softens: or it begins and wants to putrefy.
For blood is cut off by a tourniquet; therefore return to your operation until you finish it.
Then inquire with your index finger if anything remains from the ligatures or other small ones; therefore cut them and clean them.
But if there is a large vein at the root of the ligature, then it is necessary that you not cut that ligature from its root; rather it is necessary that you tie it with a strong doubled thread and let it go until it falls off by itself without harm.
Then fill the wound with old cotton, which you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment. Then care for it yourself.
If the whole ligature is cut, then it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound; and sew it immediately after you see that there is no remaining superfluity at all.
But if you see that there is remaining superfluity because of the size of the ligature, then it is necessary that you direct yourself to cutting the root of it and extracting it; and administer the suture as we said.
And that which from the ligatures contains moisture, pierce it with a superficial perforation so that the place of its maturity appears to you; and put the perforation away from what follows below the body as we said.
Then administer after the perforation lint with ointment and the like so that it corrodes what remains from the decay until when you see the wound already cleansed; then care for it with generative ointment of flesh until it is healed.
Chapter Forty-Third.
On the Section of the Epiglottis from an Abscess Accidentally in the Throat.
The ancients said this section was in the epiglottis and I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it; and this is the writing of their speech.
But in those who have synanche, it is necessary that the section of the epiglottis be performed because it does not bring benefit through it; therefore, because all veins and lungs are weak.
In those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or throat, or both tonsils, when there is no pain in the canal, it is necessary to use the incision of the epiglottis, to avoid the danger that arises from premature cutting.
Therefore, when we wish to do this, we must cut the epiglottis under three or four circles of the epiglottis, with a small incision across its width, in the space between the two circles, so that the incision is in the mucous membrane, not in the cartilage; and this place is indeed suitable for incision because it is covered with flesh, and blood vessels are distant from it.
But if the surgeon is fearful, then he must stretch the skin of the throat with a hook. Then let him fix the skin until he reaches the canal: divert the blood vessels if he sees anything coming from them.
Then let him cut the mucous membrane as we have described; and it is recognized by the discharge of pus from it, with that which bursts forth, and the interruption of speech.
And leave the wound open for a time.
When therefore, the hour arrives in which premature cutting is feared, bring together the two lips of the wound of the skin and sew it alone without cartilage.
Then administer medicines that promote the growth of flesh until it heals.
Says Albucasis. The sum of this discourse which we have described is not to be attempted except when they see that one of these abscesses has already choked the throat of the sick person; and he is raised up toward death, and wishes to interrupt his breath: they go to cutting the epiglottis so that the sick person may breathe through the wound with a certain respiration, and be saved from death; and for this reason they prescribed leaving the wound open until the malice of the sickness is consumed, and its malice lasts three days, or thereabouts; then they prescribed sewing up the wound and taking care of it until it heals.
And what I myself have seen is that one maidservant took a knife and sent it into her throat and it fell with it upon part of the pulmonary canal.
And I was called to her care and found her moaning like the moan of the dead.
Therefore I examined the wound and found little blood that had come forth from the wound. Therefore I was puzzled for she had not severed a vein nor a sinew and air was escaping from the wound.
I hastened therefore and sutured her wound and cared for it until it was healed and nothing happened to the maidservant except hoarseness in her voice and she returned after days to a better state of health.
Therefore from this I say that there is no fear in the incision of the epiglottis.
Concerning the section of a hernia of the throat.
Chapter Forty-Four.
This swelling called a hernia of the throat is a large swelling according to the color of the body and it is found much more often in women.
And it occurs in two ways either it is natural or it is accidental.
In the natural one there is certainly no skill required.
The accidental one however is according to two ways of which one is similar to fatty nodes. And the other way is similar to a swelling that occurs from the knotting of an artery. And in it there is fear and one ought not presume to approach it with an iron except when it is small and you should test it and investigate it carefully with a probe. If therefore you find it similar to a fatty node and it is not suspended with any veins then cut it out as nodes are cut out and extract it along with what it contains from the cyst if it is in a cyst and if not then scrutinize its entirety. Then care for the place with what is necessary for healing until it is healed.
Chapter Forty-Five.
On the Section of Kinds of Knots.
There are many kinds of knots, and I have already said all their kinds in the division, and it is necessary that I tell here the difference between a knot and an excrescence, since it is a doubt-causing matter.
Therefore I say that when there is an excrescence, there is heat and fever and violent pains until the boiling of excess is settled and putrefaction is completed, then indeed the fever and heat subside.
But with a knot there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains them in sacs called sifachin which are their own pouches, and they are according to the color of the body; and the beginning of them is like a chickpea, and it becomes like a bean, larger and smaller.
And they are according to two kinds: either fatty or containing humidity. And the colors of humidity are many, according to what I said in the division.
Therefore it is necessary, when you come to the healing of a knot, that you experiment on it and inquire into it first with an instrument called an intromissor, according to which its shape will come in the chapter which is after this.
And the method of inquiry for all abscesses and knots is to take this instrument and insert it into the wetter place which you find in the abscess; and you revolve your fingers with it gradually until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the skin. Then finally place your hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess.
Then withdraw the intromissor and consider that which comes out in its trail.
Therefore if humidity flows out, whatever its color may be, then dry it with a superficial incision, according to what I said in the other abscesses.
And if the humidity does not exit in the track of the Intromissi, then you will know that it is fat; therefore cut upon it with a section having the form of a cross, according to this form as I have taught you; and suspend it with hooks, and flay the skin from every part easily; and keep the kistin upon it if you are able, so that you may draw out the whole thing healthy with the knot.
But if the kistin is broken at the operation, and it is not possible to draw it out whole, for this often happens, then draw it out in pieces until nothing remains of it.
For if a little or much remains of it, the Knot returns most often.
And if it overcomes you, and a little remains of it: then fill the wound at its completion with certain corrosive and sharp powders; and bind the wound, and place upon it something that sits hot and poulticed, and care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
But if it is a large Knot, then suture its two lips together, and care for it as it grows into flesh.
But if a vein that is pulsating or not pulsating is contrary to you: then hurry and fill the place with triturated terebinth, and leave it tight for two days or three until the wound putrefies and the ebullition of blood subsides; then return to cutting that which remained from the Knot.
Chapter XLVI.
Concerning external instruments for incision and perforation.
Of these are the forms of Intromissi, and they are of three kinds.
For of them there is a large one, and of them there is a medium one, and of them there is a small one.
Let them be made of tempered iron with square ends, so that they may hurry the entry into the abscess.
And these are the forms of Experimentis; that is to say, perforating ones; and one of them is called a "beris," that is, "perforator"; and they are of three kinds.
For from them there is a large one, and a medium one, and a small one.
It is agreed that they should be investigated through them abscesses, and fistulas, and buboes from that which is between them of bones.
And others are made round, smooth, polished, like large needles with which stitches are taken, of yellow brass, or of bronze, or iron, or silver.
And the better ones are those that are made of yellow brass.
And experience is also made of black lead, which are suitable so that fistulas may be tested through them, whose concavity has reflections, so that they are reflected with their smoothness with those reflections.
And they are again of three kinds. For from them there are long ones, from them medium ones, and from them short ones, according to the quantity of the amplitude of the fistula and its constriction.
The Form of Hooks, and they are of many kinds.
For from them there are simple ones, namely those which have one curve: and they are of three kinds as you see, Large, Medium, and Small.
And from them there are blind Hooks: and they are of three kinds.
And from them there are hooks having two curvatures, and they are of three kinds: and from them there are hooks having three curvatures, and they are of three kinds: and all these are necessary in their place.
And these are the forms of Scalpels, with which nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped: and they are of three kinds: for from them there is a large one, a medium one, and a small one.
Their points with which the cutting is done are sharp, other points are not sharp: and they are not put so, unless so that relief may be given in scraping nodes when there is fear of cutting a vein or nerve: and that the sick person may be healed by them and find tranquility for a little time from the burning he finds in scraping an abscess.
They are made of bronze, and they are similar to a ladle, with which alcohol is made; and at the wide end there is a concealed spatulate point; and through it one can direct it inwards, and outwards as you wish, just as you see.
The spatulas which are concealed between the fingers at the opening of abscesses; and the sick do not perceive them; and they are of three kinds, large, medium, and small.
Forms of wind instruments with which the flow of blood is cut off; and they are of three kinds, large, medium, and small.
Let them be made of bronze, or brass, round, and somewhat long, as you see; and they should be delicate.
And it is necessary that you have these kinds of wind instruments, both large and small, so that you may cut blood quickly when needed, and then when medicine is not present for you.
However, do not use them in cutting blood in every place of the body, and do not use them except in fleshy places: such as the calves of the legs, and the hip, and the calves of the arms, and the breasts, and the belly, and the groin, and similar ones, from the fleshy calves, humid ones.
And sometimes they are made into other small instruments similar to pistachio shells, according to their shape; with which blood is cut off when it flows from the place of phlebotomy, or at the incision of a vein, or artery: and sometimes they are made round according to this shape.
Chapter XLVII.
Concerning the care of men's breasts which resemble women's breasts.
Sometimes the nipples of some men swell up during sleep (that is, when they begin to become aroused in their sleep) until they resemble women's breasts; and they remain foul abscesses.
Therefore, whoever shrinks from that, must cut above the nipples with a crescent-shaped incision, according to this form from line b to line g. Then flay off all the fat. Then fill the wound with flesh-colored medicine. Then bring together the two lips of the wound with suture, and care for it until it heals.
But if the nipple inclines downward and softens because of its size, as happens to women: then it is necessary that it be cut in its two upper sides with two similar incisions of a crescent shape, each of which is joined with the other at the ends of each, until there is a larger line containing the smaller one, according to this form from line b to line g. Then flay off the skin that is between the two lips and remove the fat, and administer what we said about suture and powders, which is necessary for healing, until it heals.
But if you do not complete the incision as needed because of the patient's restlessness or because of bleeding: then it is necessary that you fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it until it corrodes what remains of the fat. Then care for it until it heals.
Concerning the piercing of an abscess which occurs under the nipple.
Chapter XLVIII.
These abscesses that occur under the nipple are of hard types of Strophulus which contain cysts and those which contain moisture.
Those therefore that are of the types which contain moisture, must be cut with a crescent-shaped incision, according to this form, from line b to line g. When therefore all that is in the abscess is evacuated as pus, then fill it with old cotton and leave it until another day.
Then remove the cotton and treat it with a suitable ointment for that purpose, until it heals.
If the abscess is of the kind of nodes called Strophularia, then split it open above itself, just as we said in the section on Strophularia equally.
But if the wound extends so that it emits pus, then apply a cautery to it according as we said in what has been stated before.
Chapter XLIX.
On the incision of an abscess which occurs because of an artery and vein.
When an artery is ruptured and the skin above it consolidates, then very often an abscess arises from that; and similarly it happens with a vein, so that an abscess and swelling occur in it.
And the signs by which it is recognized that the abscess and swelling are due to an artery and a vein are these: because when the abscess is due to an artery, it is long, aggregated deep in the body; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel as if there were a creaking sound.
And that which is due to a vein is round and manifest on the body.
And incision of this abscess is an error, and especially that which is under the armpits, groins, neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very large. Therefore it is necessary that its treatment be directed with iron and what arises from them also in the extremities, or in the head, must be directed.
Therefore on that which arises from the inflation of the orifice of the artery, make an incision in the skin in length. Then open the incision with hooks, then the artery; and free it from the tunics until it is exposed.
Then insert a needle under it and make it penetrate up to the other side and tie off the artery with a double thread in two places according to what I taught you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples.
Then puncture the place which is between the two ligatures with a scalpel until all the blood within it exits and the abscess is resolved.
Then apply a treatment that produces pus until the ligaments fall away; afterwards treat it with suitable ointments until it is healed.
But if it be an abscess due to the cutting of a vein, then you must hold with your hand as much as possible of the abscess with the skin. Then introduce a needle under the place which you held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and let there be a double thread in it until you draw it out from the other side. Then tie with the abscess a good ligature; according as I told you about the ligature of a vein, from two parts with two ends of thread.
But if you fear that the thread may be drawn out, then introduce another needle with another thread under the whole abscess at the incision of the needle; press and tighten your threads in four places.
Then cut the abscess in its middle until what is in it comes out; then cut away excess skin and let that which is tied be released from it.
Then place upon it a poultice which you have soaked in wine and oil. Then apply treatment, which is made with lint and ointments until it heals.
Chapter 1.
Concerning an abscess that occurs from the twisting of Nerves.
Just as an abscess occurs in an artery and vein, similarly an abscess occurs in nerves; which happens in them by a blow, or from excessive labor, and similar things; and it most often happens in those places where the auxiliaries are, or the heel, and in any place where joints are moved; and the abscess is serious.
It resembles the color of the rest of the body and is in many dispositions without pain; and when it is squeezed with vehemence, one feels a weakness in it similar to a stupor.
And it is not an abscess gathered deep within the body, but rather under the skin, and it moves to every part; and it does not go forward to the front, nor back to the rear.
Therefore, what is among them at the joints should not be entered with iron. For perhaps contraction may occur.
But for that which is among them on the head or forehead, cut the skin with a scalpel. If therefore it is a small abscess, then hold it with forceps and cut it off at the root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook and flay it; then remove it, and bring the wound together with suture; and care for it until it heals.
Chapter LI.
Concerning the incision of an abscess which occurs in the abdomen.
There sometimes occur in the abdomens of certain men, and in other parts of their bodies, swellings which are called fungal, by similarity to fungi.
Their root is slender, and their head is thick, and their lips are inverted. And some of them are small; and some of them grow very large.
And I myself have indeed already seen a man, and in his abdomen were two swellings which were more like fungi than anything else: there was no difference between them, white, of small root, and their lips were inverted and split, and moisture always flowed from them.
Therefore I cut into them and found that one weighed about ten and eight ounces and the other about six ounces.
For very often much blood is expelled at its incision; therefore hasten, if blood overpowers you, then cauterize it.
But if you see a weak and timid one shrinking from the incision with a knife, then take a thread made of lead cleanly, and bind it with that thread on the finger: the method of which is what we have said, and let it go for two days.
Then add to the lead constriction. Therefore do not cease to bind the lead whenever it presses on the fingertip until it is cut off and falls by itself without effort.
But if the fingertip is of a thick root, then there is some fear and trembling in its incision; especially that which is in the abdomen.
However it is possible to cut half of it. Then cauterize it so that it does not grow back.
Then care for it until the wound heals.
And be careful not to presume to cut a fingertip that is dark colored, numb, and ugly looking; for it is indeed a cancerous ulcer; and I will come with a remembrance of Cancer after this.
Chapter 52.
On the treatment of umbilical hernias.
An umbilical hernia occurs from many causes. Or it arises from fissures in the abdominal muscles, which are above the abdomen; and intestines or omentum comes out of them, according to what happens in other ruptures. Or from blood flowing from a vein or an artery, according to what was previously mentioned. Or from wind confined within it.
But if it is due to a fissure in the muscles, and there is protrusion of fat; then its color is similar to the color of the body, and it is soft, without pain; and it appears in various positions. And if it is due to the protrusion of intestine, then its location, as we have described it, is of a more intense variety. Therefore, when you press it with your fingers, it disappears; then it returns, and perhaps there is a sound with it; and it swells greatly at the entrance of the bath, and there is vehement labor.
But if it is due to moisture, it is soft, then it does not disappear when you press it with your hand, nor is there constriction, nor is it added.
But if it is due to blood, then with these signs an abscess appears tending toward blackness from the cleavage.
But if it is due to flesh produced: then the abscess is grave, thick, hard, and is fixed according to a single quantity.
But if it is due to windiness, then its touch is soft.
And the operation on it is, that you then consider if the prominence of the navel is due to blood from an Artery, or Vein, or windiness: then it is necessary that you prohibit its cure. For there is fear and dread, as I taught you in the chapter, in which I said abscesses are due to artery and vein.
But if the prominence of the navel is due to intestine, or a rupture: then it is necessary that you order the sick person to hold his breath and stand straight extended. Then mark with encausto all around the circumference of the navel. Afterwards order him to lie down between your hands on his back. Then encircle with a wide speculum around the navel on top of the place which you marked with encausto. Afterwards extend the middle of the abscess upwards, with a large hook. Then tie it around firmly with thread, or with a cord from silk ligature: and let the knot of the ligature be away from the incision.
Then open the extended middle of the abscess above the ligature. If therefore you find it already seized by a ligament: then draw out the ligature, and insert into it the index finger, and press the intestine towards the interior of the abdomen; and if you find a tumor, then take it up with a hook, and cut off its excess.
But if it is an artery or vein contrary to you: then bind it very much. Then return to your operation. And take two needles, and insert into them two strong threads; and insert the two needles into the circumference which you made around the abscess in the manner of a cross, which you make penetrate.
Then draw tight the abscess in four places over the needles; and if you wish, remove the needles, and leave the place until the extended flesh rots; and it falls off by itself: or cut it when it softens and decays.
Then care for it with what is necessary from ointments until it heals.
But if the prominence of the navel is from flesh growing in it, or from moisture; then it is necessary to make concave abscesses as we said. And draw out the blood or moisture which you find in it.
Then care for it with what strengthens the place.
Chapter Fifty-Three.
Concerning the Care of CANCER.
We have already said in the division of species of Cancer, and how the way is to its cure with medicines; and caution should be taken from it with its cure with iron, so that it is not ulcerated; and we have said Cancer generated in the womb, and caution from its cure.
And the ancients said that sometimes Cancer is in a place where it is possible for its eradication; such as Cancer which is in the breasts or in the thigh, and those similar to them, from the limbs located for extracting all of it; especially when it is beginning and small.
But when it grows old and is large, it is not necessary to approach it.
For I myself was unable to heal anyone from it, nor did I see anyone before me who had attained that.
And the operation in this case, when it is situated as we have said, is to precede and loosen the weak one from the black bile several times. Then phlebotomy itself if you find him with manifest repletion.
Then prepare the weak one with preparation, in which he should be placed during the operation.
Then throw into the cancer hooked instruments which are suitable for it. Then scoop it out from every part with skin, according to examination, until nothing remains of its roots: and let the blood flow and do not cut it quickly, rather press the places, and wipe away all the thick blood with your hand or with whatever instrument is possible there.
But if the thick flow of blood from the incision of an artery or vein opposes you: then cauterize the vein until the blood is cut off. Then care for it with the remaining care until it is healed.
Concerning the Care of Dropsy.
Chapter Fifty-Four. We have already narrated in the division the types of dropsy and how the accumulation of water occurs; and the signs of every type, and its cure with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is no other than the ascites type alone; and it does not approach the tympanitic type with iron nor the hydropic type at all, for that is fatal.
When you have already treated this type of dropsy, tympanitic, with medicines and your medication has not been successful, then consider. For if weakness has already overtaken the weak one or there is another ailment with him besides dropsy; such as if there is a cough with it, or loosening of the bowels, and things similar to those: then beware of treating him with iron; for there is fear of that.
If however you see a weak one of excessive humor, and there is no illness with him except dropsy alone: and he is neither a boy nor an old man: then the method of operation on him is that you raise the weak one standing between your hands, and the attendant behind him presses his belly with his hand, driving the water to the lower part of the chest.
Then take a thorny spathe, according to this form. Let it be long, with two pointed ends, sharp at the extremity like a spathe. However, let there be some slight shortness in it so that you do not pierce through to the intestines during the operation and injure them.
Then consider. For if the dropsy is generated from the intestines, then it is necessary that you lengthen the incision from the navel by the length of three fingers, downwards in its direction above the chest.
But if the dropsy is generated because of a liver ailment, then let your incision be on the left from the navel by three fingers.
And if its generation is because of the spleen, then let the incision be on the right side; and it is also not necessary for the incision to be on the side where the weak one wishes to lie, so that superfluities do not flow to that weak place.
Then pierce the skin through with an instrument. Then insert into that incision, and raise your hand with the spathe between the skin and the flesh, and flay it as if you were skinning it; and let the amount flayed be the size of a nail, or thereabouts.
Then pierce the flesh until the spathe reaches the empty space: and that is the place of water. Then extract it and insert into the opening an instrument of this form. It is like a cannula; it is made of silver, or bronze, or brass, smooth, polished; with a small hole at its lower end and three holes on its sides, two on one side and one on the other; and its extremity is cut in the manner of an incision on a reed, as you see: there is a ring at its upper end.
For when the instrument reaches the water, then it descends immediately upon the instrument; therefore, it evacuates from the water in an hour a medium quantity.
For if you evacuate from it more than is necessary, perhaps the sick person dies in an hour through the resolution of his own animal spirit; or he suffers a swoon which approaches death.
But evacuate from it according to the quantity of its strength, and according to what the sick person's dispositions signify to you from the strength of his pulse, and from his goodness.
Then extract the instrument, and retain the water.
Which is because it is retained immediately on account of the skin which retains the hole which is above the sifac; about which I have spoken, so that you pierce it according to that method.
Then repeat the instrument on the next day, if you see the sick person tolerate it; and evacuate also from the water a small quantity.
Do that for several days without fear, and guard yourself from error: until there does not remain from the water except a little.
But if you fear for the sick person, and you release much from the water; then care for him with burial in warm sand, and much sweat in a bath and sun, and expect thirst upon him; and care for him with drying medicines until he is healed: and cauterize upon the stomach, and liver, and spleen, after the extraction of the water; according to what I have spoken in what precedes.
Concerning the care of infants who are born with their urine passages not perforated.
Chapter 51.
When anyone of infants emerges from the belly of its mother, and the head of its penis is not perforated, or the hole is tight, or it is in an improper place.
Therefore it is necessary to assist with its perforation immediately when it is born with a fine Spatula, according to this form.
Then put a fine plumb bob into the hole and tie it; and hold it for three or four days.
When he therefore wishes to pass urine, remove it and let him urinate. Then replace it.
And if you do not put in a plumb bob, it is possible that the urine flowing over the place will not allow it to be closed.
He whose opening is tight should be treated with a plumb bob, as we said, for many days until it is enlarged.
Those in whom the opening is not in its proper place are injured. This is because in those who are born, the opening is at the end of the head of the penis; therefore he cannot urinate forward until he raises his penis with his own hand upward. Nor is there generation for him because the semen cannot reach the womb according to straightness and it is a very foul disease.
And the method of operation on him is that the sick man should be laid on his back. Then extend the head of his penis with your left hand by a strong extension and cut the head of the penis from the place of the glans, with a sharp knife or lancet; as the incision of a reed, or as you shave something so that its middle comes to resemble the head of the penis; and so that the opening falls in the middle as it should be.
And beware during your operation of the flow of blood. For this often happens. Therefore oppose to him something that stops the blood and care for the wound until it is healed.
Concerning the diseases which occur in the foreskin and head of the penis and corruption, blackness, and adhesion.
Chapter Fifty-Six.
These diseases often occur on the penis and there is a protuberance of foul flesh.
And from it one is malignant and another is not malignant.
Therefore the non-malignant one ought to be suspended with a fine hook, and cut off until it is completely cleansed. Then place upon it cotton submerged in Egyptian ointment. Then treat it afterwards with dyafinicon ointment until it is healed.
But if the Albather is malignant and foul-colored, then it is necessary to administer a cautery upon it after its incision and excision.
But if the Albather is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised captive, and a part of the Albather is between the foreskin and a part is outside: then it is necessary to remove the Albather which is inside first until when it consolidates, then treat that which is outside; because when you treat them together, the foreskin will not be secured from being perforated.
And also there occur in the testicles a blackness and corruption of the foreskin. Therefore it is necessary that you scoop out all that has already been blackened and what desires to be corrupted or is already corrupted.
Then smear upon it afterwards with honey which has already been mixed with flour of pomegranate seeds and crushed sieve herbs.
Then treat it with the remaining treatment until it is healed.
But if bleeding should occur, then administer a cautery with a lunar cautery according to this form.
For the cautery is helpful for two conditions at once, namely for bleeding and for a wound when it becomes corrupted.
But if the head of the penis is eaten away and destroyed altogether within an hour: then it is necessary to insert into the urethra of the penis a cannula made from lead so that the weak one may urinate upon it.
But in the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis; and this adhesion indeed does not occur except in him whose foreskin is healthy and circumcision is not required upon it: and sometimes adhesion occurs because of a wound or an abscess; therefore it is necessary to scrape it away with a blunt Spatula until the ligament is loosened and the head of the penis is freed from every part.
If it is difficult to distinguish these precisely, then you must scrape something from the head of a twig, and from the foreskin. This is because when the foreskin is delicate, it may perhaps be perforated quickly on account of its delicacy.
Then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a fine linen cloth, which has already been moistened in cold water so that they do not stick together again.
Then treat it with astringent wine until it is consolidated.
Chapter LVII.
On the cleansing of infants and their treatment when injured by accident.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity like other wounds: nevertheless, since it is from our operation, by our will, and its use is especially in boys, it is necessary that we mark in it a better operation and an easier way leading to health.
Therefore I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books: because they do not use it in their laws and it is nothing but what we have acquired through experience.
This is because I have found the greater part of craftsmen and phlebotomists to use cleansing by circumcising with a razor and forceps: and they use alum and ligature with thread, and incision with a nail.
And I myself have already tried all these methods and found none better than cleansing with forceps and ligature with thread.
Because in cleansing with a razor, the skin often escapes. Because the foreskin skin has two coats; therefore perhaps the upper skin is cut and the lower coat remains: it is then necessary to incise again to cut the other, and pain will ensue. And with cleansing which is done by alum, that is, a digital method which tailors use, the incision of the extremity of the male member is not secure: because it may perhaps enter its opening.
In cleansing, however, if the nail is involved, perhaps iron will come out and spoil your operation; and indeed the skin of a child is short by nature and very often they are born like this so that they do not need cleansing; and I have already seen this.
But cleansing with forceps and tying with thread has proven a good experiment for me; because forceps are proportionate to the incision: therefore, because the sharpness which is above is like the sharpness which is below. Therefore, when you apply your hand beforehand, the two sharpnesses are proportioned and they fall according to the single operation at one time; and a compression is made in a similar shape, containing the skin of a stick from every side, with which there is no error at all.
And the method of the operation itself is such that you should make a child, especially if he is one who understands a little, understand that you are not doing anything except tying thread on his stick and let him go until another day.
Then make him rejoice and be merry in every way possible for him so that he receives his intelligence from it. Then make him stand between your hands in a prepared posture and let him not be sitting; and hide the forceps in your sleeve or under your foot so that the boy does not see them at all, nor anything of the instruments.
Then insert your hand towards his stick and blow on the skin and draw it upwards until the head of the stick comes out. Then cleanse it from what gathers in it of filth.
Then tie the marked spot with a double thread. Afterwards, tie a little further down a second ligature. Then hold with your index finger and thumb the place of the lower ligature with good retention and cut between the two ligatures. Then quickly lift the skin upwards and extract the head of the stick. Then let the blood run gradually (for it is better) and put powder on top: and on the powder a cloth in which an egg yolk boiled in rose water has been spread, shaken with good fresh rose oil; and leave it over it until another day: and take care of it with the rest of the treatment, until it heals.
The form of the forceps for cleansing is this.
Let the two ends be blunt, and let them converge: so that a clavicle branch does not come out of them: and let the length of the two points be equal to the length of two handles equally.
But an error falling in cleansing is this: because perhaps the whole inner skin escapes, or a part of it at the incision.
Therefore it is necessary that you extend it from your hour with your nail before applying the poultice to the place: and cut it according to equality.
But if you cannot hold it with your nail, then pull it out with a hook, and cut it.
But if three days have passed it, and what is under the rod remains swollen, poultice it: then let it be until the poultice becomes hot, and the skin loosens it easily, and cut it according to what is prepared for you: and beware of the head of the rod. For it will not harm it.
Therefore care for it with what strengthens the wound from powders, which we have described in the treatise on powders: and if it is cut from the skin above measure, and extends to the upper parts, it will not harm it either.
Therefore care for it with what we have said, until it heals.
Chapter LVIII.
Concerning the extraction of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made from stone, or congealed blood, or pus, or flesh born, and similar things from those which we have said from the modes of treatment in division.
And if urine is not passed, and you see that its retention is due to a stone which is already in the neck of the bladder; then it is necessary that he be weak, bent over on his knees. Then let his feet be placed upon his back, and let him extend his belly from the upper part of his back, and let the weak one draw in his breath as much as possible for him. Therefore, when the neck of the bladder is directed towards the expulsion of the stone to the rear: urine is discharged.
And if it is not passed with what we have said, and the matter is vehement upon the weak one; then it is necessary that you administer extraction of it with an instrument which is called a syringe, which has this form: Let it be of silver, and let it be subtle, smooth, concave like the quill of a bird's feather in the subtlety of a ray, long in the likeness of a palm and a half; to which there should be a subtle cannula at its head.
And the method of the exit of urine through it is, that you take a doubled thread and bind wool or tow at its extremity with a good ligature; and insert the extremity of the thread into the lower part of the syringe; and cut off any excess from the wool with forceps, but insert it into the cannula with violence, like an alzer.
Then smear the syringe with oil, or butter, and egg white; and have the weak one sit upon a seat, and embrocate the bladder and its rod with moist oils, olive oil, and warm water.
Then insert the syringe into the rod easily until it reaches the root of the rod.
Then double it above from the part of the umbilicus.
Then press the syringe within it until it reaches the bladder, and let the weak one feel that it has already reached the empty thing; and this is not done according to this order unless because the passage in which it goes is where there is a twisting.
Then extend the thread with wool gradually. For the vein will follow the wool.
Then draw it out, and make the vein run along the path of the urine; and repeat the syringe, and do not cease to do that until the bladder is emptied, and the sick person finds relief.
Concerning the quality of the washing out of the bladder with a Clepshydra.
Chapter LIX.
When an ulcer occurs in the bladder, or blood congeals in it, or pus is constricted in it, and you wish to distill waters and medicines into it; then let it be done with an instrument which is called a Clepshydra, and this is its form.
For it is deaf, that is, closed. And in it are three openings, two on one side, and one on the other side, as you see.
And the concave place, in which is that which propels it, be according to the quantity which it will expel itself without addition, until when it is drawn with it something, from moisture it is attracted: and when it is propelled, with it it is expelled afar: according to what the clepshydra does, by which naptha is projected, that is, Greek fire in the battles of Mars.
When therefore you wish to project moisture into the bladder, introduce the extremity of the clepshydra into the moisture, and draw with it that which propels it upwards, for the moisture is attracted into the concavity of the clepshydra.
Then introduce its extremity into the urethra, according to what we have related in the syringe. Then propel the moisture with that which propels it; for the moisture reaches the bladder immediately, so that the sick person feels it.
The form of a delicate clyster by which the bladder is washed out.
Let it be made of silver, or electrum; whose head be higher like a small spoon, and under it a sinus into which a ligature may fall.
Then take a bladder of a ram and put into it the moisture with which you wish to irrigate the bladder. Then tie it between two folds with a strong ligature using double thread, and warm that moisture a little over the fire.
Then introduce the extremity of the clyster into a rod, then tighten your hand over the bladder with moisture with decent compression until the weak person feels that the moisture has already reached the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder at hand, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it, and pierce it through all its roundness. Then insert strong thread into those holes, as they revolve. Then gather the circle as it is gathered as a bandage; after you put in it what you wish from moistures and oils and waters.
Then tie it on the instrument; and do with it as you did with the bladder from expression with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter LX.
On the Extraction of a Stone.
We have already said in the division the species of stone and its treatment with medicine, and I said the difference between a stone generated in the kidneys and the bladder, and the signs of it all; and I said the stone in which the operation falls with the hand and section; and there is a stone generated properly in the bladder; and that which is lodged in the urethra; and I am relating that with manifest exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore, I say that a stone generated in the bladder most often happens to boys.
And among the signs of it is that urine goes out from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and there appears in it white sand, and the weak man rubs his urethra, and labors with it, and very often hangs. Then he becomes erect, and goes out with it the anus in many of them.
And the healing of boys is easy, until they reach fourteen years. And it is difficult in old men. But in young men it is intermediate, in that which is between those things; and of him whose stone is larger, healing is easier; and if small, the care is the opposite.
Therefore when we come to the healing, it is necessary first of all that we cleanse the sick person with an enema, which extracts all the dung that is in his intestines; for it sometimes hinders the discovery of the stone in the examination.
Then let the sick person be taken with his feet, and shaken, and moved downward so that the stone descends to the depth of the bladder, or jumps from a high place several times.
Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and let his hands be under his own hips so that the whole bladder becomes sloping downwards.
Then inquire of him, and touch him externally.
Therefore if you feel the stone in a space, then hurry immediately with an incision above it.
But if it does not fall at all under your touch, then you must smear the index finger with oil from the left hand, if the sick person is a boy; or the middle finger if he is a grown young man; and introduce it into his anus, and inquire about the stone until it stands under your finger, and turn him gradually towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press upon it with your finger, and drive it outwards towards the place where you wish for the incision; and instruct a minister to press the bladder with his hand, and instruct another minister to extend the testicles with his right hand upward; and with his other hand, to remove the skin which is under the testicles in the part where the section is.
Then introduce an incizing speculum whose form is this. And find in it what is between the anus and testicles, and not in the middle, to the side of the left buttock; and let the incision be above it on a stone, and your finger be in the anus; and let the incision be transverse, so that the external incision is wide and the internal one is tight, according to the quantity so that the exit of the stone from it is not greater.
Perhaps indeed the finger, which is in the anus, compresses the stone at the incision, and it exits without difficulty.
And know that from a stone which has angles and edges, therefore its exit is difficult because of that.
And from it is smooth, like a gland, and round: and its exit is easy.
Therefore to him who has angles and edges, add to the fissure.
But if it does not exit this way, then it is necessary that you ingeniously place something above it: or tie a string above it with a decent gesture, whose extremity is like the moon, which will bind above the stone and will not slip from it; or insert a subtle instrument of curved extremity under it.
But if you are unable to do so above it, then enlarge the opening a little. But if something from the blood overcomes you, cut it off with a lancet.
But if there is more than one stone, then first drive the largest one to the opening of the bladder. Then cut above it. Afterwards drive the small one after it, and similarly do if there are more than two.
But if it is very large, it is ignorance to make a section above it large. For it happens to the weak one of two things, either that he dies, or that there occurs to him a constant distillation of urine: because the place does not consolidate at all.
Rather administer its expulsion until it exits: or ingeniously break it with forceps until you extract it in pieces.
When therefore you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with frankincense and aloes and dragon's blood; and bind it up, and lay over it a cloth steeped in oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water: so that a hot poultice may be formed.
Then place the patient on his back upon his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day. When therefore you unloose it, embrocate the place with water and much oil.
Then care for it with dyafinicon ointment and basilicon ointment until it is healed.
But if it should happen that a hot abscess is added to the wound, and corrosion, and things similar to these; such as if the blood should congeal in the bladder and urine be prevented from it; and this is known from the issuing of blood with the urine. Then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood. For if it remains, it leads to the corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt; and apply to it everything suitable for its cure until it is healed.
And it is necessary in the course of the whole treatment that you should bind both thighs and shins, because of the medicines which are placed upon the spot.
But if the stone is small and is in the urethra and is fixed there and prevents the urine from passing out; then treat it with what I have related before you come to section. Very often indeed you are excused from section by this treatment, for I have already proved it.
And it is that you should take a perforator of alferic iron, which has this form: triangular point, sharp, fixed in wood.
Then take a thread and tie the penis with it under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then introduce the penetrating iron into the urethra with ease, until the perforator reaches the stone itself; and revolve the perforator with your hand in the stone gradually; and try to make perforation of it, until you make it penetrate from the other side.
For then urine is immediately discharged.
Then press your hand upon that which remains of the stone from the outer part of the urethra. For it itself is broken, and goes out with the urine, and the sick person is healed.
But if this treatment is not prepared for you because of something which prevents it: then tie a thread below the stone, and another thread above the stone. Then cut above the stone in the urethra itself between the two ligatures. Then extract it. Afterwards untie the ligature, and cleanse the congealed blood, which is made in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie the thread below the stone unless so that it does not return to the bladder; and the other thread above unless so that when the thread is untied after the exit of the stone, the skin returns to its place and the wound heals; and for this reason it is necessary for you when you tie the upper thread, that you lift the skin upwards so that it returns to your complement and heals the wound as we said.
Chapter LXI.
Concerning the Extraction of Stones from Women.
Few stones are generated in women.
But if it should happen to any of them that a stone occurs, then the cure is difficult and is forbidden because of many ways.
One of these is that the woman perhaps is a virgin.
And the second is because you do not find a woman who will reveal herself to the doctor when she is chaste or from those having husbands.
The third is because you do not find a woman well-knowing this art, especially the operation with the hand.
The fourth is the distance from the stone's location: therefore it requires deep incision, and there is danger in that.
If necessity provokes that, then it is fitting that you take a female physician, well-knowing: and few are found.
But if you deprive her of those things, then seek a chaste physician, subtle, and present a female midwife well-taught in the matter of women, or a woman who inclines toward this art: therefore make her present, and especially instruct her to do all that you command her from inquiry about the stone.
First of all, it is necessary that she look to see if the woman is a virgin: then it is fitting that she insert a finger into her anus and seek the stone.
If therefore she finds it, let her constrict it under her finger, and then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vulva of the infirm woman and inquire about the stone, after she places her left hand upon the bladder and compresses it with good pressure.
If therefore she finds the stone, then it is necessary that gradually she move it from the orifice of the bladder to the lower parts with all her strength until it arrives with it at the root of the thigh.
Then let her cut above it at the opposition of the middle of the vulva at the root of the thigh, from whichever part she prepares it and feels the stone in that part: and let her finger not be removed from the stone, constricting under it: and let the incision be small at first. Then let her insert a ray over that incision.
Then let her insert a ray over that incision. If therefore she feels the stone, then let her add to the incision according to the proportion of quantity as the stone goes forth from it.
And know that there are many kinds of stones. From these indeed there is a small one, and a large one, a smooth one and a rough one, a long one, and a round one having branches.
Therefore know its kind, so that it may be shown to you by this concerning that which you wish.
If therefore blood overcomes you, then add in the place triticum flour, and hold it for one hour, until the blood is cut off.
Then return to your operation, until the stone comes out; and do that you prepare for yourself from the instruments which I said in the extraction of a stone in men, so that you may help through them in your operation.
But if the flow of blood overcomes you, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery which has been cut: then put powder on the place, and bind it with powders a decent binding; and do not change that; and leave the stone, and do not extract it. For perhaps the weak woman may die. Then care for the wound.
When therefore the sharpness of blood subsides after days, and the place festers, then return to your operation, until the stone comes out.
Chapter 62.
Concerning the incision for a watery hernia.
A watery hernia is not anything but a gathering of moisture in the tunica albuginea, which is under the skin containing the testicle; and it is called the tunica albuginea.
And sometimes it is in the panniculus itself which nature has prepared for it in that part, until it swells: which is another egg; and it is the skin of the testicle between the tunica albuginea, which we said; and this does not happen except rarely.
And the generation indeed of this hernia is from a weakening which occurs in the testicles; therefore this matter flows to them. And sometimes it happens from a blow upon the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors. For either its color is inclined to a citron yellow, or it is bloody red, or fecal black, or it is watery white, and that is what is more common.
And the signs by which it is known where there is a collection of water are these. For if it is in the white part that we mentioned, then it is a round abscess somewhat in length like the shape of an egg; and the testicle does not appear, because the moisture contains it from every side.
And if the moisture is in its own pouch, then the abscess is round with a part like an egg, and because of this a man thinks it is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white part, then it falls below sensation.
Therefore when you wish to know the color of the moisture, then experience the color of the moisture in the abscess with a square instrument, whose shape has preceded. According to that therefore which comes out in the track of the Instrument, judge concerning that which is between it.
When therefore we come to the treatment with iron, it is necessary that you direct the sick person to be bled if it is possible for him, and you see his body full.
Then he is laid on his back upon something high a little, and put under him many cloths.
Then sit you upon his left, and direct the assistant to sit at his right, who shall extend his rod to one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles and to the part near the navel.
Then take a broad speculum and cut the skin of the testicles from the middle through the length, as far as near the pubic bone; and let the incision be according to the straightness of an equidistant line which divides the skin of the testicles until it reaches the white part comprehending; and flay this and observe, or be careful from this so that you do not cut this: and let your flaying be such that by which you flay this, on the side which hangs with the egg more: and carefully scrutinize with the flaying according to the quantity which is possible for you.
Then pierce the full bladder with a wide perforation and extract all the water.
Then separate between the two lips of the incision with hooks and extend the bladder upwards, and do not touch the skin enveloping the testicles; and incise the bladder in any way possible for you to incise it, either with its entirety or in parts, especially its thin side. For if you do not meticulously examine it, there is no safety in its incision lest the water return.
But if the external testicle proceeds from its skin during your operation: then when you have completed the incision of the bladder, replace it. Then bring together the two lips of the skin of the testicles with suture.
Then care for it like other wounds until it heals.
But if you find the testicle corrupted from blackness or another cause, then it is necessary to tie off the vessels which are the spermatic cord, fearing a flow of blood.
Then cut off the testicle with its spermatic cord and extract the testicle; afterward care for it as we have said.
But if the water is collected in two parts, then know that there are two branches; therefore cut off the other part as you did to the other equally.
And if it seems right to you for there to be one operation, then do so; then wash away the blood. And insert into the incisions wool soaked in oil, or in rose oil; and put outside other wool than that which you submerged in wine and oil, and spread it over the two testicles and the belly; and put double cloths on top of these, and they are poultices; and tie them on top with a bandage having six folds according to this form.
Then take two cloths and soak them and fill them with carminated bran according to this similarity; and let their ends be those by which they are pressed from the elbow, or damp wool; and gather them together with a binding at the lumbar region of the arms; and let one end receive upon the anus up to the back, and let the second receive upon the region of the chest; and let two ends be upon the two thighs below, and let the other two ends be upon the two groins, and let the whole binding be gathered in the lumbar region of the arms.
And sometimes this wound is artificially treated with a cautery in the place of incision with an iron; and it is such that you should take a sharp knife-cautery and cut the skin of the testicles with it; and it is ignited according to what we have said: until when white pus containing water is revealed: then take a cautery, in this shape.
Greek letters are assimilated.
Then pierce that pus with it, and ignite it until all the moisture comes out.
Then extend the pus with hooks, and flay it with a thin ignited cautery, and cut it according to what is possible for you, until you root out all of it.
And be careful that the fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is safer, and farther from a flow of blood, and better than the operation with incision.
But if it causes you opposition in the hour of incision, or in the hour of cautery a hot abscess, or a flow of blood, or anything else: then it is necessary that you cure what opposition it causes you from it with the care that suits it, according to what has been said before.
But if he is weak and fearful, and does not await this operation because of its horror: then administer a perforation according to what I narrate that: and it is.
When it is confirmed to you that by that which we have said of the significations, that the wound is watery: then it is necessary for you to make the weak one sit on a raised seat.
Then pierce the abscess in the lower part of it with a broad spatula; and place the piercing according to the length of the body, and let the opening be wide until all the water runs out.
Then place a compress on the place and bind it, and let it be so that the remaining water runs out; then care for it until the wound is healed.
But if the opposition is to the water's escape in the hour that you pierce it, and this is not except because the white panniculus makes opposition at the wound's orifice, and prohibits the exit of the water, then it is necessary that you introduce a pen into the wound, or an instrument with which water from hydrops patients is extracted, whose shape precedes: or add a little to the operation of the wound.
And know that water returns and gathers after six months, or thereabouts. Therefore when it gathers, then it is perforated in the same way, and the weak man will pass his days.
Chapter Sixty-Third.
Concerning the treatment of fleshy branches.
Know that in the section over this branch, there is fear leading to destruction in many constitutions. Therefore it seems to me that its dismissal is saving from it.
And I remember the operation on it and the kind of abscess.
I say, therefore, that many abscesses occur in bodies, from which testicles are composed, and this happens for many reasons, namely.
Either from acute or sharp superabundance, which is poured onto the testicles. Or from a blow.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body and pain is not found in it: and the abscess is grave.
And perhaps it is a stony abscess, whose color is dark brown, and there is no sensation in it.
And sometimes it occurs from the knotting of arteries and their inflation, as already previously remembered; or from the inflation of veins.
That which is from them by inflation of arteries, is recognized by the arrangement of the abscess when you compress it with your fingers. And it is not necessary to touch it completely.
That which is done by the inflation of veins, nothing is dispersed from it upon compression with fingers.
And now it is possible that a section be made on this kind and the remaining flesh, and it is to cut the skin of the testicles. Then extend the testicle upward and extract it with white silk; and free the spermatic cord from the vessels and tie off the vessels; and cut the spermatic cord after you free it from every part of the parts of the testicle.
If therefore the testicle is consolidated with those flesh born with it then it is necessary that you draw out the testicle and cut it.
And if there is adhesion between something of the spermatic cord or in that which is between the vessels then it is necessary that you free all that adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
But if there is a natural growth of flesh in the place of adhesion which is behind then it is necessary that you cut all of it and extract the testicle as we said.
When therefore your operation is complete then fill the wound with lint steeped in rose oil and wine; then care for it with the remaining care until it heals.
Chapter LXIII.
Concerning the Care of Branch Wounds which are with Vine.
Hydrocele is a swelling enveloped by a certain involution, like a hernia, with softening of the testicles; and it makes difficult movement and exercise, and walking upon the weak person.
And in the treatment of this disease there is fear because of that of which we have previously made mention.
But it is necessary that we say that the operation in it should be according to what the first did.
I therefore say that it is necessary that you make the weak person sit upon an elevated seat. Then press the spermatic cord of the testicles downward. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, together with the veins that are near the penis; and let another assistant hold them, and extend them with a vigorous extension.
Then make an incision with a broad, sharp scalpel in a transverse section in the direction of the vessels, until the vessels are exposed.
Then flay the skin from every part, as we told you in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Then fix a needle into them, in which there is a doubled thread; and tie it in the first of the places where the veins occur; and tie it again in the last of them. Then cut them in a straight section in the middle according to the length of the body, and extract what is collected from foul, corrupted humors.
Then care for the wound as you would care for other wounds, in which you wish to generate pus, so that the vessels that nourish one of the testicles may fall away. For it is not bad through that.
But if it should happen to the vein with all the veins, then it is necessary that the testicles be extracted along with the veins so that the testicle is not deprived of nourishment because of the incision, and waste away, or become scorched, and there be no benefit with them.
Chapter Sixty-Fifth.
Concerning the care of the branches of the intestines.
The occurrence of this branches is from a section that happens in the extended abdomen above the belly in the groin part of the belly.
Therefore the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the testicles. And this rupture is either from the abdomen or extension thereof.
And these two kinds occur from many causes; either from a blow or a jump or a shout or lifting a heavy thing and the like.
And the sign when it is from an extension of the abdomen. It happens gradually over a long time and does not happen suddenly: and it is an abscess equal towards the depth: because the sifach compresses the intestine.
And its sign when it is from the section of the sifach, because it causes to happen from its beginning intense pain suddenly: and it is a different abscess, appearing under the skin nearby: and that is because of the exit of the intestine, and its course to the exterior of the sifach.
And sometimes it issues forth with intestine pus: and this is called intestinal Ramex and zirbia: and sometimes it happens with flatulence.
And sometimes feces runs into the intestine and is retained there: and with it there is danger to the sick person: because it causes severe pain to happen, and especially when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of these kinds of sicknesses with iron there is fear: therefore it is necessary that one be cautious in this matter.
And the method of operation is, that you order the sick person to reduce the intestine with his own hand into the interior of its cavity, if it obeys return. Then he is laid down on his back between your hands; and his legs are raised.
Then extend the skin which follows the skin upwards, and cut all the skin of the testicles along its length. Then fix hooks in the two lips of the incision, according to how you need to open the incision with them: and the incision should be according to the quantity which is possible so that an egg can come out from it.
Then scrape the siphash, and what are under the skin of the testicles, until when the white siphash is uncovered, hard on every side: then introduce your index finger into it which follows the testicle, into that which is between the white siphash, which is under the skin, and the second siphash: and loosen with it the adhesion which is in the back part of the testicle.
Then move with your right hand to the inner skin of the testicles and while doing so stretch the white silk upwards with your left hand; and lift the testicle with the silk towards the section part, and tell the assistant to stretch the testicle upwards; and you loosen the adhesion which is behind after the complete solution.
And search with your fingers that there is nothing therein from the intestine unraveled in the hard white silk. But if you find anything from it, then press it down towards the lower abdomen.
Then take a needle in which there is a thick thread made of licorice from ten threads and insert it at the last silk that is, the tunic which is under the skin of the testicles following the section; then cut off the ends which protrude from the thread until there are four threads. Then arrange some of them over some with a figure which is in the manner of a cross and tie them with the silk which we mentioned because it is under the skin of the testicles with a strong ligament until none of the vessels which nourish them can send anything to them so that a hot abscess does not occur from there. And place again a second ligature outside the first ligature, distant from it by less than two fingers. And after these two ligatures dismiss from the silk which is under the skin of the testicles a quantity of the size of a finger and cut the remainder entirely according to its roundness and remove the testicle from it.
Then cut in the lower part of the skin of the testicles with a section from which blood and pus flow as we have related in what precedes.
Then administer wool soaked in oil and place it in the wound; and administer the ligature which we have related. And sometimes the white silk which we mentioned is cauterized after its incision fearing the flow of blood. Very often it happens. And release the ligature until it falls off by itself.
But if its falling is delayed, then embrocate it with warm water and place that which we said upon it until it falls.
Then care for the wound with the remaining care of wounds until it is healed.
Chapter Sixty-six.
Concerning a windy branch.
In this branch I have not seen anyone who dared to treat it with iron.
And first indeed they said that it is done as we narrated in the branch which is with a vine. Which is, to tie the vessels after section above them with ease below: then cut in the middle and finally care for it with that which opens it up until the vessels fall off: and care for the wound according to what we said until it heals.
Chapter Sixty-seven.
Concerning a disruption which occurs in the groins.
When a rupture occurs in the groins as we said and the place protrudes and nothing from the intestines descends to the testicles: and if it descends it is a little and returns in all hours: but if time prolongs with it, a fissure is added into the inguinal region until the intestines descend into the inguinal region.
And this happens from the extension of the inguinal region which is in the groins as we said. Which is because the inguinal region is extended: then it softens and the place becomes inflamed and protrudes.
And its care is with a cautery as its previous narration preceded.
And sometimes it is cared for with iron according to this manner: and it is that the sick person lies on their back between your hands. Then cut the inflamed and protruding place of the rupture by a width according to the quantity of three fingers.
Then bind the ligature and what is under the skin until a white vein, which follows it, appears.
Then take a lancet and place it upon the prominent spot from the vein and press it deep into the abdomen.
Then make two prominent spots above the end of the lancet from the vein and join them together with a suture; then withdraw the end of the lancet.
And do not cut the vein at all, nor strain the egg, nor anything else, as I have taught you in the treatment of a ruptured intestine.
Then treat it with wound care. When therefore you cut the threads, cleanse it and restore the wound until it consolidates.
For the vein will contract and no prominence of rupture will be added.
And cautery is better in this place; for it is nearer to safety.
Chapter LXVIII.
Concerning the softening of the skin of the testicles.
Very often the skin of the testicles is softened in certain men, on account of which the flesh between them is softened and its appearance is marred.
Therefore it is necessary for him who is consulted in its treatment to make the sick man lie on his back and cut away all the softened skin upon the natural skin.
Then he will bring together the two lips with a suture; and if you wish, first make three or four sutures on the excess softened skin and secure the sutures.
Then cut between the sutures.
Then treat it with the care of other wounds until it is healed and the threads fall away.
Chapter LXIX.
Concerning castration.
Know that castration is excommunicated in our law and for this reason it would be permissible for me not to remember it in this book of mine; and there is no need to recall it except for two reasons.
One of them is that it be in the knowledge of medicine when questioned about it, and that he know its cure to which it happens.
And another way is that we very often need the castration of certain animals for our benefits through it, such as rams, goats, and cats, and similar animals.
Therefore I say that castration is done according to two methods. Or by abrasion. Or by fissure and incision.
But in that which is done by abrasion, the way of the operation is: that we make the animal sit in hot water until its testicles are softened and made pliable, and hang down; then rub them with your hand until they are resolved and do not appear to the touch.
But in castration by fissure and incision, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then tie the suspensory ligament and cut above the whole testicle with one incision until when two testicles proceed: then incise them after you have skinned both, and do not leave anything above them except a fine silk thread which is above the vessels.
And this method of castration is better than that which is done by abrasion: because abrasion may perhaps leave something of the testicles, wherefore the animal desires copulation.
Then care for the wound until it heals.
Chapter Seventy.
Concerning the care of hermaphrodites in two ways.
A hermaphrodite is from males according to two methods. One of them is because it appears in it that there follows a space, or in the skin of the testicles, in that which is between the two testicles, a figure like a woman's vulva, in which there are hairs: and sometimes urine flows from that which is in the skin of the testicles.
In women there is one species, and it is the vulva of a woman above the pubic bone just like the testicles of a man small indeed, prominent externally: of which one is like the penis of a man, and two are like two testicles.
And the treatment of the three species, two from men and one species from women, is: because it is necessary that you cut away the added flesh until the impression of them escapes. Then care for them with the treatment of other wounds.
But in the second species of men, from which urine flows out, which is in the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is there any treatment at all.
Chapter Seventy-One.
On the Incision of a Tent-like Structure and Prominent Flesh in the Vulva of Women.
A tent-like structure perhaps is added on top of the natural part until its appearance becomes ugly and foul: and sometimes it magnifies in certain women so much that it expands like in men, and reaches as far as intercourse.
Therefore it is necessary that you hold the excess of the tent-like structure with your hand, or with a hook, and cut it; and do not stop in the incision, especially in the depth of the root: so that bleeding does not occur.
Then care for it with the treatment of wounds until it heals.
But the flesh that arises is flesh which is born in the opening of the womb until it fills it; and perhaps it protrudes outwardly according to the likeness of a tail; and because of this, some of the ancients name the ailment tailed. Therefore it is necessary that we cut it just as we cut the tent-like structure, and care for it until it heals.
On the Treatment of Atresia, Which Is an Imperforate Vulva.
Chapter Seventy-Two.
Atresia is when the vulva of a woman is not perforated, or when there is a small opening. And it is either natural or accidental.
It is accidental from a preceding illness and it indeed arises either from added flesh, or a thin or thick ulcer and it occurs either in the depth of the matrix, or on its sides, or on its upper part, or its lower part; and it prevents coitus, impregnation, childbirth and perhaps menstruation.
And recognition of it is made by the midwife's inspection if the suture is an apparent approach.
But if it is not apparent then seek it with your fingers or a probe.
But if the suture is from a thin ulcer and is near both lips then hasten and disrupt it.
And it is necessary to place poultices upon the two lips.
Then place the index fingers of both your hands together and let the woman be on her back with her legs spread. Then extend the two lips with force until the thin ulcer is disrupted and the suture is opened.
Then take wool and soak it in oil and place it upon the spot, and let the woman come every day so that the place does not consolidate with other fluids.
But if the ulcer is large and thick then it is necessary to cut it out with a broad spatula like a myrtle leaf.
But if the suture is from added flesh then suspend it with hooks and cut into it and have with you medications which stop the flow of blood without biting such as acacia, dragon's blood, and litharge mixed with albumen.
Then insert a wide lead cannula so that the wound does not consolidate quickly, and hold it for several days; then administer linen cerate from dry flax, and then let the rest be cared for until it is healed.
And sometimes other flesh growths are born within the matrix; therefore it is necessary that they be cut according to this method: but if there is a cancerous abscess then an abscess which is cancerous within the matrix should not at all be opposed with iron.
Chapter Seventy-Three.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, Athehelil and Bothor rubeae in the vulvas of women.
Hemorrhoids are indeed the open orifices of veins, from which much blood constantly flows.
Therefore when hemorrhoids become ancient they become thelil and as I have already said in the division of their kinds and signs, I will say here which receive cure from them and which do not.
I therefore say that hemorrhoids which are in the orifice of the uterus and do not appear to the sense, then there is no cure for them with iron.
Those however which are from them in the orifice of the uterus on which sense falls are those that are cured.
It is necessary therefore that you introduce the woman into a cold house. Then extend the athehelil with forceps or with a rough cloth and cut them out from their roots.
Then powder over them at the flow of blood from one of the cutting powders without modification: such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and thus, and those similar to them.
Then press her feet against the wall for one hour. Afterwards place her in cold water.
And if the flow of blood persists then make her sit in a decoction of sumac, and pomegranate rinds, and galls, and similar things.
Then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it on her back.
If therefore the blood is cut off with it, it is good and if not, make the windy ones adhere to the back and breasts without scarification.
Then take wool and submerge it in the juice of tarathit or the juice of arnoglossa or the juice of the branches of alaula which is aglanter, Pontic wine, and make it adhere to the place.
Therefore, when the abscess is quiet, care for the place with ointments until it heals.
But albarth is reddish and similar to the heads of alfalfa, and has a rough appearance.
Therefore it is necessary that you cut out what appears from it, according to what I said in the chapter equally; and care for it until it heals.
Chapter Seventy-Four.
Concerning the Perforation of a Fistula Which Occurs in the Womb.
Many kinds of abscesses occur in the womb, such as cancer, and stony abscess, and ulcers, and adubelati, and alekilati, that is herpes, aestiomemus, and fistulas, and hemorrhoids, and fissures, and thelil, and hot abscess.
And I have indeed already said all these diseases and their kinds, and their signs, and their treatments in the division: it is necessary that I say in this treatise about a hot abscess which occurs in the womb, when it is from abscesses which collect pus, and you wish to know how its opening is made with an iron instrument.
Therefore it is necessary that you consider. Then if the pain of the abscess in its beginning is sharp with percussion, and burning, and fever; and you see it reddening; if numbness falls upon it, then do not hurry with its perforation; and care for it with that which helps with its maturation, until when the sharpness of the accidents subsides.
Then it is necessary that you make the woman sit upon a seat which beats two seats, and recline, or lean upon her back, and gather her feet to the lower part of her belly; and let her hips be spread, and put her arms under her knees, and bind each one with a suitable ligament to it.
Then let the midwife sit from her right side, and administer the instrument by which the opening of the womb is opened.
And it is necessary when you wish to administer this instrument, that you fix it with the Speculum deep in the matrix of the woman: so that what enters from the instrument is not more than the depth of the matrix, and injures the delicate parts.
But if the instrument is more than deep, then it is necessary that you place pledgets upon the covering of the deep matrix: so that entry of the whole instrument into the depth of the matrix is prohibited: and it is necessary that you place a knob, which runs in the instrument, from its upper side: and that you hold the instrument, and that the attendant turns the knob until the deep matrix is opened.
Therefore when the Cervix appears and is touched by the hand, and it is soft and pliable: then it is necessary that you cut it at its head with a broad spatula.
Therefore when the blood is evacuated, then it is necessary that you place a linen cloth steeped in rose oil or green oil, in which there is some astringency: and place the linen cloth, and draw out the incision into the depth of the matrix.
And place externally upon the matrix, and upon the comb clean wool steeped in water, in which apples have been boiled.
Then let it be cared for after two days with ointment which suits it, until it is healed.
And sometimes the matrix and wound are washed, so that it is cleansed with water and honey: then with water in which the root of a lily or long birthwort has been boiled: then return to ointment.
But if the wound is hidden interiorly within the matrix, then it is necessary that you withhold from its treatment with iron, but rather treat it with what we said in the division.
Chapter LXXV.
Doctrine of Obstetrics, how living embryos are treated, according to a figure not natural.
It is necessary for a midwife to know first the form of natural childbirth.
Therefore, from these signs it is so that when you see a woman pressing down towards her lower parts, and she desires to smell the air, and relief comes over her about the matter of childbirth upon her, and she hastens the exit of the embryo: then you know that this childbirth is according to the natural form, and its exit is upon its head, and secondarily with it; or suspended, or hanging from the umbilical cord.
Therefore when you see these signs, it is necessary that her belly be compressed so that the embryo descends quickly.
For when it descends upon its head, the second child descends with it, and it is cleansed from those superfluities by a good cleansing.
But that which is besides this childbirth is unnatural, undesirable.
For sometimes the fetus exits upon its feet, and its body exits before its head, and its feet and hands together, or one of its feet; or its head and hands exit; or its belly exits; and perhaps it turns upon its neck, and similar undesirable figures.
Therefore it is necessary for a midwife to be prudent, subtle in all these matters, and to beware of error and deception: and I am showing every figure from them, and how its nature is in it, and let it be signified by that, and let it stand upon it.
When the fetus exits upon its head in its natural exit, and it becomes vehement upon the woman, and childbirth becomes difficult for her, and you see her strength already weakened; then make her sit upon a seat, or let women hold her; and apply vapors to her vulva with decocted fenugreek, and with moist oils.
Then let the midwife insert a small spatula between her fingers, and bind it with the second child, and cut it with her fingernail until what is in it runs out from moisture; and press the woman's belly until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, then she must be given an enema of fenugreek mucilage with sesamum oil.
Then order her after the enema to be compressed; and make her snore while she is being compressed, and hold her mouth and nose for one hour. For the fetus will immediately come out.
But if two hands of the fetus emerge first, it is necessary that you reduce them gradually with ease. But if it does not obey upon entering, then place the woman on a seat and elevate her feet upward; then strike the seat upon the ground; and let the woman be held so that she does not fall during the impact.
But if the hands do not emerge and the fetus dies, then cut them open and extract the remaining fetus; and tie his hand with a cloth and pull it out evenly, for it will come out itself.
The delivery of an embryo on its feet. When the fetus comes out on its feet, then it is necessary to push them upward; then turn the fetus gradually; afterwards equalize it.
Then let him take hold of one of its feet and extend it gradually.
When they emerge up to the hips, then order her to be compressed and make her snore while she is being compressed; for it will come out if God wills.
And if it does not come out with what we have related, then reduce the fetus gradually until you place it according to its natural form. For it will then come out with an easy delivery.
But if it is hindered with all that we have related, then take fenugreek mucilage and sesamum oil, and dissolved gum; and strike the whole in a mortar with good percussion; then mix it with the vulva of the woman and below her belly. Then have her sit in warm water until the hypocondrium is reached.
When therefore you see that her lower parts are already heated, then give her a suppository of myrrh and insert it. When therefore she has held the suppository for an hour, then have her sit upon a seat. Then have her strain; and bind her mouth and nose; and press the lower part of the belly with a gentle compression. For the fetus will immediately come out.
The exit of the fetus over the knees and hands. When it exits according to this form, then begin gently inserting your hands. Then the woman is turned onto her neck, and her feet hang down to the lower part; and she lies upon the bed, and folds her hands. Then press upon her belly gently. Then extract what is under her feet from the pillows until it is prepared in the lower part. But if the fetus does not exit, then take hold of her feet and move them with a vigorous motion. Then press upon what is above the hypocondrium gently until the fetus ascends to the upper parts. Then let her insert her hands and equalize the fetus gently; and instruct the woman to compress until the fetus exits.
The exit of the fetus hanging laterally from the hands. Begin by reducing her hand. But if she cannot reduce it, then raise the woman and have her walk.
But if she cannot walk, then have her lie upon the bed and strike her legs with a vigorous concussion.
Then administer the liniment which you prepared from gums.
But if she receives labor pains, then have her sit upon a seat. Then strive in the reduction of the hand, and equalize the swelling according to the natural shape; and have the woman cough, and instruct her to compress herself until it comes out.
The exit of the fetus over its neck, with hands spread, and its face toward the back of its mother. It is necessary for the midwife to hold the hand of the fetus, then gradually turn it and align it with ease.
When, therefore, it is aligned, then place on its vulva what we have described made of oil and mucilages.
Then instruct her to move gradually. When you have done this, then have her sit upon a seat and instruct her to lean towards her right side. Then instruct her to compress herself; and have her cough when it is condensed.
The exit of the prepared fetus over its side. When it descends to the orifice of the matrix in this way with the secundina, then cut the secundina with your fingernail until it is evacuated from moisture.
If it therefore hangs over the face of the fetus and its neck, then cut it from the navel so that it is not retained and dies.
Then push the fetus toward the interior until you place it according to what is necessary; and instruct the woman to compress herself several times: for it itself will exit with an easy passage.
The Exit of Twins, or Many Fetuses. Know that twins very often are born; and sometimes three, and four are born. However, that is extraordinary and rarely happens.
Five is a thing against nature and they do not live entirely; and it contains them, however many they may be, with one secundina; and they are separated by the sifach, distinguishing between them the ligature in the navel of each of them.
And sometimes they exit as easily as a fetus exits naturally; and sometimes they exit with an unfortunate outcome, as we have described.
But if some of them are difficult at childbirth and reach that which we said of unnatural figures, then care for them as we have described: and let there be a skilled midwife, and let her do what she does with ease and delay, and devise according to every shape with that which is prepared for her by ingenuity leading to health.
Remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos, and miscarry.
Sometimes one is formed in the womb, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten: and it has already been verified by me that a woman miscarrying emitted seven, and another fifteen, all formed.
Which was done by the measurement of the glorious wise one.
Therefore all this must be in the knowledge of Obstetrics. For perhaps she may come across one like that; therefore oppose to her what is necessary.
Chapter Seventy-Six.
On the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you care for a dead fetus with what I said in the division from medication, and it does not exit, and you are forced to use surgery with your hand, then it is necessary that you consider.
If therefore the woman is of sound health and is not with any accidents from which her loss is feared: then it is necessary that the woman be laid on her back on a bed, and let her head be inclined downwards, and let her legs be raised; and let assistants hold her from two sides, or let her be tied to the bed so that her body is not pulled out at the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the mouth of the womb with oily substances with a decoction of marshmallow, fenugreek, and flaxseed.
Then the midwife shall anoint her hand with these oils and mucilages; then she shall introduce it into the womb easily. Then she shall seek with it a place in which to fasten the hooks from the fetus, and places suitable for that.
Therefore consider then if the fetus is prepared to descend upon its head; then fix the hooks into its eyes, or into its neck, or into its mouth, or into its palate, or under its beard, or into its clavicle, or into places near the ribs, and under the hypochondria.
But if the descent is upon its feet, then into its breastbone, and its middle ribs.
And it is necessary that she hold the hook with her right hand; and place the curve of it into that which is between the fingers of her left hand; and introduce it with her hand easily, and fasten the hook into one of those places which we have said until she reaches a void space.
Then she shall fasten opposite it another hook, or a third if necessary; so that there be equal contraction and it does not incline to one side.
Then let it be extended with equal extension, and let there not be extension according to straightness only, but rather let it be moved to every side so that its exit is eased; just as is done when extracting a tooth.
And it is necessary that in that which is between it, the extension be softened. But if a part is retained from it, then the midwife must anoint certain fingers with oil and introduce them from the side so that she may turn what is retained with them.
Therefore if a part of the fetus exits, then let the hooks be changed to another place which is higher; do this until the whole fetus exits.
Therefore if the hand exits before the other parts and it is not possible to reduce it because of its constriction; then a cloth must be wrapped over it. Then extract it until the whole thing comes out, cut it either at the junction of the sole or on the elbow: and thus you must do in one hand, and in both feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or constriction occurs at the outlet, or there is water collected in its head: then it is necessary that you insert the Spatumile spinosum between your fingers, and pierce the head with it, and extract the water: or break it up with an instrument called Almisdac: the form of which comes with the forms of the other instruments in the chapter which follows this.
Similarly, if the fetus is of a large-headed nature, it is necessary that you make an incision with an algengemat: or extract it with a misdach, as we have said. Then draw out the bones with forceps.
But if the head comes out, and is constricted at the fork: then pierce it until the moisture which is in the chest flows out.
But if it does not become entangled, nor yield to the outlet: then cut the head into pieces as best you can.
But if there is an abscess below the belly, or there is dropsy in it: then you must pierce it until the moisture runs out of it.
But if the fetus is on its feet, then its attraction is easy, and its direction to the mouth of the uterus is slight.
But if it is constricted at the belly or chest: then you must extract it with a cloth which you have put over your hand: and pierce the belly or chest until what is in them runs out.
But if the remaining limbs are removed and the head returns: then let the midwife insert her left hand. Therefore, if the mouth of the uterus is open, let her insert her hand deep into the uterus, and seek out the head with it, and draw it up to the mouth of the uterus with her fingers: then let her insert one hook or two hooks into it and draw it out with them.
If the mouth of the uterus is constricted due to a hot abscess that occurs there, then it is not necessary for him to work on it, but rather he should then administer a pouring-on of humid and fatty things, and apply poultices, and sit in waters which soften and moisten.
If the fetus is on its side, then it is possible that it may be straightened; then let what we said about the living fetus be administered.
But if that is not possible, then let it be cut in pieces, and taken out.
And it is necessary that you do not leave anything from the secundines inside at all.
Therefore when you have completed your operation, then administer what we said about hot abscesses which occur in uteruses.
If a flow of blood should happen, then let her descend into astringent waters and administer the remaining care.
And I myself have indeed already seen a woman in whose belly a fetus had died, then she became pregnant again on top of it with another, afterwards the other fetus also died. Therefore it happened to her after a long time that an abscess occurred in her navel and it became swollen until it opened and began to emit pus.
I was therefore called for her care and I treated her for a long time, and the wound did not consolidate.
Therefore I put on it some poultices of strong attraction and an opening came out in its place. Then several days passed and another opening came out. I therefore wondered because there was no opening in the belly.
I therefore thought that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
I therefore examined the wound and extracted many bones with the woman being in a better state; and she now lives thus for a long time, and emits little pus from its place.
I did not include this here except because it contains knowledge and assistance for what the craftsman physician administers with his hand from healing.
Chapter Seventy-Seven.
On the forms of instruments necessary in the extraction of a fetus.
The shape of the spindle by which the mold is opened.
Below is the form of a Strictor, by which books are equaled, to which are equally two vortices at the two ends of two pieces of wood. However, these Vortices ought to be more subtle than the Strictor: and so it is made, either from ebony or boxwood.
And let the width of all the wood be like two fingers; and the edge of each of both is like one finger, and the length of each of them is a palm and a half; and in the middle of the two pieces of wood are two additions of the same kind of wood, which have already been fixed in both, whose length is half a palm and more or less; and the width of each is like two fingers, or more or less.
And these two additions are inserted into the opening of the mold so that it is opened with them when you turn the two spindles.
Another shape similar to that one, more slender and lighter.
Let it be made of ebony wood or boxwood, according to the likeness of forceps. However, at its extremity let there be two additions, as you see here above; and the length of each addition from them is like a palm; and the width of each is two fingers.
Therefore when you wish to open the mold with it, then make the woman sit on a bed with her feet hanging down, opening what is between her thighs. Then insert these two joined additions into the mold; and you are holding the lower end of the instrument between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps, equally according to the amount which you wish from the opening of the mold's mouth until the midwife does what she wants.
The shape of another spindle which the ancients called the Impelling Form, by which the fetus is impelled.
The shape of Almisdac, by which a large head is crushed; and it is assimilated to forceps, which have teeth at the extremity, as you see.
And sometimes it is made oblong, like forceps according to this shape as you see, which have teeth like the teeth of a saw by which it is incised and crushed.
The form of the instrument having one spine.
The form of the instrument having two spines.
The form of the Spatula having two ends for cutting off the head.
The form of two spatulas also wide.
All these instruments are used, and the more their kinds are multiplied and they are prepared by the craftsman, the quicker they are for their operation, and the higher they are esteemed by men, because of their quantity.
Therefore do not scorn to have from them an instrument prepared at hand. For the necessity of them is inexcusable.
Chapter LXXVIII.
Concerning the Extraction of a Second Child.
When the second child is retained at delivery, it is necessary that you command the weak woman to retain her breath. Then make her groan when she bears down; and bind your hand over her mouth and nostrils. If therefore it goes forth by this means, it is good.
If not: then take a jar and make a hole in the lid; and put into it herbs which open the mouth of the womb, such as calamus, rue, dill, chamomile, saffron, cinnamon wood, and centaury; take all these herbs or some of them, and steep them with water, and place them over the fire.
Then put a reed tube over the hole in the lid of the jar and insert the other end into the mouth of the womb; and let her hold it until the vapor reaches the cavity of the womb.
Then make her groan as we have said. For the second child will then come forth with ease.
If, however, it remains after this treatment and does not come out, then order the midwife to submerge her hand in sesame oil or hollyhock mucilage. Then let her insert it into the vulva and seek with it the Secondine. When she therefore finds it, then let her take hold of it and gradually extend it.
But if it is attached deep within the uterus, then let her insert her hand as we have described until she finds the Secondine and gradually draw it out according to its straightness so that the uterus does not fall due to a strong pull; rather, it must be moved with ease to the right and left sides; then increase the force of the attraction. For it then obeys and is preserved and comes loose from its adhesion.
But if the uterus opening is constricted as we have already described, treat it with sneezing and a decoction from herbs.
But if it does not come out with all that we have described, then be careful not to tire yourself in repeated attempts at extraction.
But it is necessary that what comes out to the uterus opening from it, you tie to the woman's thigh. Then give her an enema with tetrapharmacum ointment. For it will putrefy it after a few days and dissolve, and come out.
But truly when it putrefies, a foul odor rises from it to the stomach and head and harms the weak one. It is therefore necessary that suitable fumigations be administered for it.
Some of the ancients who are already experienced have used fumigation from nasturtium and dried figs.
The form of the instrument by which a woman is fumigated for retention of the Secondine and menses.
Let it be made from glass like an alembic or from lead; and let the wide end be placed over the fire; and let the fumigation be placed on top of prunes; let her hold it until that fumigation is consumed; and repeat another.
Chapter Seventy-Nine.
On the Treatment of an Unperforated Anus.
Many children are born with their anuses not perforated, which have already been constricted by a delicate membrane. Therefore, the midwife must perforate that membrane with her finger; and if she does not, she must perforate it with a sharp spatulette; and beware of touching the sphincter muscle.
Then place wool soaked in wine and oil upon it. Then care for it with ointments until it is healed.
But if you fear that it will constrict, then place a lead cannula in the opening for many days, and remove it when the child wishes to defecate.
And it now happens that constriction of the anus also occurs from consolidation of a wound or an abscess. Therefore, it is necessary to cut that consolidation, and then treat it with what we have said about treatment and lead.
Chapter Eighty.
On the Treatment of Fistulas which Occur in the Lower Part.
Fistulas which occur in the lower part are swellings and enlargements which happen near the anus externally; or in the space of one portion; and there is one fistula, or several.
When that swelling grows old, it opens, and a watery or thin pus flows from it.
And sometimes these fistulas are penetrating. Therefore penetrating ones are recognized by the fact that they discharge during defecation and flatulence when the patient uses defecation; and perhaps a worm emerges from them.
And there are fistulas which, when they are penetrating into the space up to the bladder and up to the urethra of the penis. And there are penetrating ones up to the hip joint and up to the coccygeal node.
To determine whether the fistula penetrates to the anus, or not, you should insert your index finger into the anus and pass a slender probe of metal, such as brass or iron, into the fistula when there is no twisting.
But if there is twisting, then insert a slender lead probe, or a horsehair, into it until you feel the probe or hair against your finger.
If you do not feel it deeply and nothing issues from the opening, neither excrement, nor flatulence, nor worms as I have said, then know that it is non-penetrating; therefore hasten to treatment.
And when the fistula penetrates to the bladder or the urethra, its indication is the discharge of urine from it and the prevention of urine flow so that the site may be consolidated with medicines.
But if it penetrates to the hip joint or the acetabulum, its sign is that a probe reaches there if there is no twisting up to the opening and the finding of pain around the area and pus always discharges from it; and medicine does not work in it nor is it consolidated with ointment.
And in all these penetrating fistulas there is no cure at all; and their treatment is toil and vanity for foolish doctors who undertake it.
But in that which is not penetrating and not old, healing is hoped for with a cautery according to what I tell you, and which I have already proven: it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and raise his legs up above his hips, and let his hips be inclined towards his belly. Then insert a lead or brass probe, if there is twisting in the fistula, until you know where the probe reaches.
But if the patient feels it around the anus, then it is necessary that you insert your index finger into the anus.
If therefore you feel that the tenon has already pierced through itself and detected it, beyond which you feel between your finger and the sifac, or flesh; then therefore know for certain that it is penetrating. Do not therefore labor in it, since it is not curable as we have said.
They however said that the flesh is healed in some men, and from the medication by which aid is hoped for, it is, to burn a subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has preceded, and to insert it ignited into the fistula until it reaches around the anus. Then repeat that twice or three times until you know that all those added filtered fleshes similar to a bird's feather quill have already been scorched.
Then treat it with linen cloths wrapped in butter until those scorched fleshes come out; then treat it with ointments generating flesh and strengthening them.
If therefore it heals, it is good.
And if not, then it never heals with any other treatment.
And if the tenon comes out and does not reach your finger which is in the anus, and there is a thick membrane of flesh or sifac between it and the tenon; and you see the fistula in that which follows the surface of the skin, then cut the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you will cut with the tenon that is in the fistula until the cutting reaches where the extremity of the tenon has reached, and the tenon is freed and falls out.
Then cleanse those filtered fleshes which are assimilated to a bird's feather quill so that nothing remains from them.
But if blood overcomes you and loosens between you and your operation so that you cut those fleshes; then it is better, and quicker for healing, to cauterize it with fire or a sharp medicine.
For the cautery with fire brings together good qualities, burning those added fleshes and cutting off blood, and drying up moistures.
Then care for it with linen cloths wrapped in butter, or bruised stems, until the place emits pus, and those burnt fleshes go out into the pus.
Then care for that wound with ointments that are consolidating, producing hard flesh; and they are medicines in which there is astringency and desiccation.
For when it is restored, then it is already healed; and do not fear repetition.
But if the fistula has already reached as far as the depth of the anus, and is lengthened from an excess of the body; then insert your finger into the anus, and inquire with it.
If therefore you feel a probe, and between you and it there is a membrane of fat, or flesh, and it is near penetration; then there is no operation in that, except according to the way of trust and hope.
Which is because it is administered in it one of three ways: either that you cauterize it itself, as we have said; or you cut away from it until you reach its concavity so that it is possible for you to insert cloths, and care for it from the proximity. And do not proceed much with the cutting so that you do not fall into the muscle containing the anus, and there occurs upon the weak an exit of excretion without will. Then care for it with what we have said.
For perhaps it will be healed; or you lengthen that membrane and clean it after you have dried it up to the anus, as we said, either with a probe, or with another instrument of sharp extremity. Then clean those filtered flesh which are in the incision, up to where you are able with examination.
Then try the restoration of the whole wound with the incision, and the upper orifice where it is consolidated; and the fistula remains open in the inner part of the anus, and it will be easier on the weak.
And sometimes a fistula is sutured according to this way; and it is when you insert a probe into the fistula, and it is on the side of the anus around the surface of the body with skin and the margin of the anus; then take a probe of perforated extremity, which is like an awl aleskef, that is, preparing leather, according to this form. Insert into it a thread wrapped with five threads around it. Then insert a probe with a thread into the fistula until it reaches its concavity.
If therefore it is penetrating into the inner margin of the anus nearby, then draw out the thread from that hole so that you insert your finger into the anus and draw out the end of the thread, and join together both ends: and tighten both, and let it remain for one or two days; and as much as the thread sinks into the flesh, tighten it well until those pieces of flesh which are between the two ends of the thread fall off; then treat the wound until it consolidates and heals.
But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate by any means prepared for you unless it is very deep. For it is not fitting for you to do that because of a tear, so as not to fall into it.
Then proceed with it as we said until it heals.
The shape of the speculum of a spine by which a fistula is split, whose curvature is very sharp and the other part is not sharp so that it does not fall into what is not necessary, as you see.
Chapter LXXXI.
On the suturing of hemorrhoids from which blood flows from their incision and treatment of fissures.
There are hemorrhoids according to two manners. For they are either within the anus similar to bladders of coals or plums, or as if they are grains of a grape. And from them there are small ones and large ones; and blood flows from them always, and it is one and there are many. And they are outside the anus and at its extremities.
But those which are outside the anus are according to most few in moisture from which runs clear water or a little blood with constant flow and they are according to the color of the body.
The treatment for that which is within the anus is to make the patient strain, and press until it comes out of the anus, and you see the hemorrhoid. Therefore suspend them with hooks; or hold them with your fingernail. Then cut them at their roots.
But if hooks do not hold them because of their moisture and softness, then take them with a rough cloth or with a swab of double wool and draw them out with your fingers. Then cut them, and sprinkle some hot powders over them after the incision so that they stand in place of a cautery. Or cauterize them according to what preceded in the chapter on cauterization. Then care for them with the remaining treatment until they are healed.
But if the anus does not yield to evacuation, then give the patient an enema in which there is a little bite so that it washes what is in the anus and yields to evacuation quickly when the patient strains.
But if the hemorrhoids are external from the anus, then their matter is light and easy; and it is to take them with your fingernail or take them with a hook, and cut them. Then care for them with what we have said until they are healed.
And he who recoils from incision with iron, then it is necessary that you administer suture of them according to this manner. Take a twisted thread and insert it into a needle. Then draw out the hemorrhoid to above and make it penetrate with the needle at its root on one side; and twist the two ends of the thread at the lower part of the needle so that they are lateral; and tighten the hemorrhoid with a strong ligature. Then tie the thread and remove the needle.
Do this with all the hemorrhoids and leave one out of them; nor suture it so that blood flows from it freely.
Then place upon the anus a cloth soaked in rose oil, or carrot, and put this upon the anus; and instruct the patient to rest. Then let him go until it falls off.
When therefore the bandages fall off, care for them with ointments, and other treatment, until they are healed.
On the Care of Fissures Very often they happen from the drying of feces, and constriction of nature.
But when they become ancient, and medicine does not prevail in them: then it is necessary that you scrape them with the point of a Spatula, or with your fingernail, until they become moist, and the upper layer which prevents them from consolidating be removed from them. Then care for them until they consolidate as is necessary.
But if they do not consolidate: then repeat them with a more vigorous reason than the first, until they bleed much, and are skinned; then care for them until they are healed.
On the Care of Inverted and Non-Inverted Hemorrhoids, and Dry Bandages and Adhesions.
Chapter Eighty-Two.
Know that a hemorrhoid is nothing but a round node according to the color of the body, similar to the head of a nail: and it occurs throughout the body, especially in the lower parts of the feet and toes: and pain arises from them upon walking.
It is therefore necessary that what is around the head of the nail be cut, and be held with forceps or a hook, and be eradicated from its root.
Then care for it; and if you wish cauterize it according to what preceded in its chapter.
But from dry bandages one is a small eminence, rough, filtered, round above the surface of the body. And they very often occur in the hands of children.
And its treatment is to extend it with a small instrument and cut it; or to tie it with silk thread; or with hair, until it falls off. And if you wish, cauterize it according to what has been said before with fire or with a sharp medicine; and now the inverted and non-inverted hairs are eradicated with an instrument that I will mention.
However, a wart is also a small, thick eminence, filtered over the surface of the body, extending deep; and when it finds cold, it feels like an ant bite therein and happens throughout the body; and most of it occurs on the hands.
And its treatment is to take a cannula from a goose feather or a strong vulture feather; and place that cannula over the wart until the circle of the cannula contains its parts. Then revolve your hand with the cannula until you cut what is in the circumference of the wart; and place it deep into the flesh and eradicate the wart from its root.
And if you wish, do this with an air or iron cannula according to this form.
Let the upper part of the cannula be drawing upward, covered with a bandage so that its grasp on the finger and its own revolution are eased.
And if you wish, cauterize the wart according to what has been said before in the cauterization of hairs in the chapter on cautery.
Chapter 83.
Concerning the forms of instruments which are administered for fistulas in diseases of the anus, and the resolution of the abdomen, and colic.
Sometimes the clyster is made of silver, or brass, or cast bronze, or hammered bronze.
And sometimes it is made from these instruments small and large according to those in which they are administered.
Therefore, that which is administered in the treatment of small children, let it be small; and those whose anuses are weak or painful, so also their clysters.
Large enema.
Its tube, that is, the upper head in which the uterus is tied, should be wide according to this manner: and let it have a distinction so that the uterus is tied as you see, and its lower end which is inserted into the anus, should be deaf, that is, not open, smooth, very drawing to subtlety: and on one side of it there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole.
And let the width of the hole be according to the thickness of the rays, and a little thicker, and let the uterus in which the medicines are placed be from an animal's bladder: or from a sheepskin, which should be according to the shape of a small asofrati: whose root is one palm.
And let it be perforated with many holes as it revolves, and the space which is between each hole be the thickness of a finger. Then insert into those holes a strong thread from raw silk, which should be from ten threads, or thereabouts, and join with it a uterus like an asofrati. When therefore the uterus is placed in it, tighten at the head of the enema between two distinguishing constrictions strongly. Then enema with it.
And this is the shape of the circle and the holes depicted here.
But the quality of enematizing with it is: to fill the uterus, or bladder with medicine which has been heated according to the amount tolerated by the sick person: and be careful that it is not too hot, or too cold.
Then let the sick person lie on his back, and raise his legs to a higher position: and put under him an inthaa, that is, a piece of leather on which people lie, or a linen cloth.
Then smear the end of the enema with oil, or with egg white, or with fenugreek mucilage, or similar substances. Then insert it into the anus with ease. Then let the attendant grasp the clyster with both his hands at once and squeeze it forcefully until he evacuates everything that is in the clyster into the intestine.
Then withdraw the clyster, and let the patient raise his legs to the wall.
If the medicine compels him to evacuate, then he should hold it in as long as he can. And if he sleeps with it all night, it is better for his recovery.
But if you clyster him in illnesses of abdominal distension and his evacuation is hastened, then repeat the clyster until he is healed.
But if there are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses in the anus, then let the clyster be very fine and gentle, like those used for children.
And this is the form of a fine clyster over which there should be a tight skin.
Chapter Eighty-Four.
I have already said in the division on the treatment of wounds what was fitting for the book, and I will say here their treatment with the hand and with medicines according to supplementation.
Therefore, I say that wounds are diversified according to what causes them and according to the place on which it falls.
The things by which wounds are made are often these, such as the throw of a stone: or a cut with a sword or knife; or a blow with a spear, wood, or arrow: and similar things from many objects.
But wounds that are made according to the locations of the body are like a wound that falls on the head or neck or chest or abdomen or back; and similar ones from those limbs.
And I am going to relate the treatments of some wounds so as to establish that reasoning and rule for the rest of the wounds.
And I will begin with simple wounds of the head: for the recollection of compound wounds will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say. Therefore, when a simple wound occurs on the head and there is no fracture of the bone, then consider whether it is from the throw of a stone or something similar, and has already broken only the skin, and the wound is large, and you fear an unfavorable outcome of a hot abscess: then hurry and immediately perform cephalic phlebotomy, and do not delay it; and draw out blood from him according to the amount of his strength. If there is nothing prohibiting phlebotomy, especially if the blood flowing from the wound is little. And let the phlebotomy be from the opposite side of the wounded part.
And let the phlebotomy be from the opposite side of the wounded part. And let the sick person beware of overeating, wine, and rich foods.
But if something prohibits reduction, then let him reduce his food intake and not approach meats or wines.
And place over the wound, if a hot abscess occurs to him, cotton infused in rose oil alone, or with wine in which there is astringency.
But if you are safe from a hot abscess, then place over the wound, if it is fresh with its own blood and has not been changed by the air, the powder which I will relate a little later: and if the air has already changed it, then place something on it as an ointment until it heals.
But if the wound is large, or is from an incision of a sword and similar instruments: and the lips thereof do not come together by powders, then bring them together with suture, according to what I will relate in abdominal wounds about their sutures.
But if the wound is already detached from the bone and hangs, and there is no retention of it except in a small suspender, then incise it. Then care for the wound with medicines and restore hard flesh in its place instead of skin, and instruct the sick person to nourish himself with foods that are dense, such as heads and cooked wheat, until it is like a pulse; and things similar to these.
If you find putrefaction in the skin, and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut out all the putrefied part and throw it away; then treat that.
But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flows and it is not severed by medication, then examine above the artery. If therefore you find it not cut, then cut it with a scalpel or tie it off. But if necessity compels when that which we have said does not work, then cauterize it until the blood is severed.
But if these wounds are small and simple, then the matter of them is easy, light so that you sprinkle this powder over them: because it hardens them before they change from air.
Method of Incarnating Powder. Take one part frankincense, and two parts dragon's blood, and three parts quicklime; grind the whole very well, and sift it; and fill the wound with it and constrict it well with a bandage until it adheres to it well and clots with the blood.
Then bind it on top with wool, and leave it alone, and do not loosen it while it remains so that it does not fester. For medicine is not removed from it until it heals.
And sometimes lime alone does it when you do not have frankincense and dragon's blood present; and it also performs the same action in many large wounds, when it is fitting to put it on them and bandage them tightly, and they are recent wounds with their own blood which has not been changed by air.
But if it has already been changed by the air with some alteration, especially when it is in summer time, then the application of this powder is not appropriate; therefore treat it with what we said so that you put some digestive ointments on them or apply poultices made from barley flour with water and honey on them until they discharge pus. Then let the rest be treated with care until they are healed.
But if it should happen that there is a fracture in the bone with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with forceps; and I will now speak of the treatment of head fractures in what is to come.
Concerning wounds of the neck.
But if a wound should happen in the neck, then there is no difference in its treatment and that of a simple head wound.
But if a nerve or artery of the neck has already been cut, then if it is a nerve, there is nothing to be done except to apply treatment that promotes strong astringency, such as alum and saffron and those similar. Because they are harmful to nerves and constrict them.
And do not put anything cold at all on the wound; because the substance of nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is more sublime than other members: and let it be treated with medicines that are mild, such as lime slaked with sweet water repeatedly infused with oil or rose oil, and tutia when washed even with sweet water: and the remaining mineral stones, in this manner, and soft ointments.
But if the wound is large, then administer a suture or bind its lips with powders. Then treat it until it is healed.
But if the wound is deep or a sinus occurs in its lower part, in which pus has already collected, then pierce it in a deeper place.
But if an artery has already been cut in the wound and its blood flow follows: then separate or cauterize it and tie it; or cauterize it, if necessity calls for it.
But if the vertebrae of the throat or the whole throat have already fallen and the ligaments are unharmed: then bring the lips of the skin together with a suture over the canal of the throat, and do not touch the throat at all; rather equalize it and return it to its natural shape. Then bind it with a decent ligature and let it alone for several days. Then care for it with ointments which have astringency and drying properties until it heals.
But if the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then examine it: then if there are bone fragments in it, extract them all, or as many as you can; and what is not prepared, leave it until the wound putrefies, and separates and its discharge is alleviated.
But if the wound is recent, then sprinkle upon it the powder which I have described. But if bone appears to be seen in the wound and a fistula forms: then treat it with that of which its remembrance comes in its own chapter.
Concerning a wound on the spatulas.
If there is a blow from a spear or knife and you see its depth, then consider. Therefore if windiness comes forth from the wound when a weak person breathes out from it, then know that the wound is mortal.
But if it is not deep for him and is recent with its own blood: then do not put powder on it from the first hour, nor bind it up so that the blood is not retained in its depth and returns to the heart and kills the weak person; but put an attractive ointment on it and dissolve it twice a day.
But if ointment is not present to you then put an old rag in the opening of the wound so that it absorbs what comes out of it from its humidity; and make the weak person sleep on the wound so that what gathers in it runs.
But if three days or more have already passed since the wound and it does not happen to the weak person that there is a spasm nor bad trembling of the heart nor constriction in breathing, and you see its remaining dispositions are good: then know that the wound is safe. Therefore treat it carefully with ointments and other care until it is healed.
But if healing is delayed and it is always open, then know that a fistula has already formed. Therefore treat it from its chapter.
And if the wound is from an incision by a sword or knife and it is simple on the surface of the chest or back, then treat it with what precedes from suture if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
But if it has already made an impression on the bone and chips come out of it, then probe the wound and hasten to extract those chips if they are separate. But if they are not separate, then leave them until the wound festers, for extraction is alleviated then.
But for the accidents of the remaining wounds on the other limbs, judgment in treatment is the same judgment that we have said.
Concerning wounds of the belly and the protrusion of intestines and their removal.
Disruption which happens to the belly is great, medium and small.
From a great one therefore sometimes intestines or a number of intestines protrude.
Therefore insertion and suture of them is more urgent and difficult.
And even a small disruption is difficult in another way. It therefore follows that its reduction is more difficult if you do not hasten in inserting it back into its place immediately; because it swells, opens, and enlarges, therefore its entry becomes difficult.
Because of this, therefore a medium disruption is better: because reduction of the intestines with it is not difficult as it becomes in these two kinds.
Know that suture of the belly is according to four methods.
Two sutures are common and apply to the suture of the belly and the suture of other wounds of the body; and two other sutures specifically belong to the remaining wounds. But they are more appropriate for suture of the abdomen and I will describe each one to you with explanation.
Therefore I say that when a wound is small and something from the intestines protrudes from it and it is difficult to reduce it: then it is due to one of two methods. Either because of the smallness of the disruption as we said or because there is inflation in the intestine due to cold air.
When therefore it is so, it is necessary that you warm it so that you submerge a sponge or cloth dampened in lukewarm water alone. Or you boil in water rue and cyperus and spikenard and embrocate with it the intestine until the inflation is resolved.
Sometimes wine in which there is astringency does it and it is better than water alone in resolving the inflation.
When therefore you see that the inflation has already been resolved then moisten the intestine with water in which marshmallow or mullein has been boiled. For by that its entrance is eased when it is small.
But if its return is excused after this treatment then make a small incision in the disruption with an instrument by which hemorrhoids are cut.
And the first treatment is better when prepared than incision and it is not necessary to resort to cutting after necessity and lack of instrument.
Let one part of it be twisted and sharp and the other part not sharp and let its subtle end not be with the subtlety of a spatula but rather be a little duller and it is that which resembles a chisel as you see.
When therefore the wound is enlarged and the intestine enters then it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form in its own place if possible above it for it is better.
But when the disruption is wide in the lower part of the abdomen then it is necessary that you make the sick person lie on his back and put his legs higher than his head. And if it is in the upper part of the belly, then place its head and chest higher than its lower parts.
And similarly if there is a rupture in one of the two parts of the belly, then place your attention and consideration always on this, that the part in which the wound is be higher than the other part.
And thus it must be done in large wounds and in medium wounds.
But in small wounds, place it according to what is prepared for you.
Then make a pious minister present between your hands, who will hold the whole rupture with his hand and bring together its lips. Then uncover from it for him who follows a stitch after a stitch, and this is the way of a common single suture.
And it is necessary that you take a needle or a number of needles according to the size of the width of the wound. Then leave from the extremity of the rupture a length of a ring finger, that is, of a physician; and fix a needle beyond which you will insert thread into it at two extremities of skin with two extremities of the underlying tissue, until you make it penetrate from the other side, and you have now brought together the two extremities of skin and the two extremities of the underlying tissue, and four rows are made.
Then tighten with double thread around the needle several times from both sides at once until two lips of the wound are brought together with decent joining.
Then leave a length of a finger also and fix another needle in them; afterwards draw it with thread just as you did with the first needle. Therefore do not cease doing this until you complete the constriction of the whole wound.
And let the needles be medium between thickness and thinness; because thin needles penetrate flesh very quickly and thick ones are difficult to enter into skin. Therefore it must be that they are medium in thinness and thickness.
And it is not necessary that the needle be fixed in two nearby extremities of the skin too much: so that the flesh does not quickly fall in, and the wound opens before its own consolidation, and they are not even elongated with the suture, so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
Then cut the extremity of the needle, so that they do not injure the weak one in his sleep; and put little wads of cloths on every side, which hold the extremities of the needles; and let them remain until you know that the wound has already consolidated.
And this kind of suture with needles is indeed more suitable in small wounds. Because it suffices in the suture of those, one needle, or two, or about that many.
But the second suture is common, so that aggregates with a suture have four extremities: two extremities of skin, and two extremities of silk in one thread, with a needle in which is wrapped a thread equal in subtlety, and thickness.
Then when you have penetrated with the needle those four extremities, reduce the needle from the side from which you began the same way, so that the drawn thread falls from the upper part of the wound: so that it is a suture, like the suture of cloth with which cloths are tied, and put between every suture an amount equal to the thickness of a finger.
But men know this suture.
And with this suture I sewed up my own wound which had happened to a man in his belly, who had been wounded with a knife, and the disruption of the wound was greater than one palm: and about two palms had come out from the intestines from the middle intestine, and the disruption was in the middle of the belly.
I therefore returned it after his intestine stood outside the wound for 24 hours.
The wound therefore consolidated in a space of about 15 days; and I looked after it, and it was healed; and he lived afterward for many years, engaged in his own affairs.
And the physicians had judged that it would not heal.
And it was a wonder that I did not treat it with ointment. For I was in a place where neither ointment nor anything from medicines was found. I therefore placed an old shirt over the wound twice a day, and I diligently washed it with honey water until it was healed.
But I will mention two proper kinds of suture according to the account of speech.
And it is, that you begin with a sharp suture: and you introduce the needle from the outer to the inner part.
When therefore the needle penetrates into the skin, and goes into the muscle according to the length and width of the whole body: let the end of the thread remain on the side in which you introduced the needle, and make it penetrate at the other end from the inner part to the outer part at the other extremity.
When therefore you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate thus in the same extremity from the outer part to the inner: and let the end of the thread which is on this side remain, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from the inner part to the outer: and make it penetrate with your penetration that you make it penetrate into the thread at the extremity which is in its part, until it penetrates the whole.
Then begin also from this same side and sew it with the end which is from the thread on the other side, and draw out the needle from the skin which it has penetrated.
Then return it into that skin and sew the end of the thread which is on the other side with this end: and draw it out from the skin which is on its side, and do this vice versa one time, and another, until you have sewn all the outside according to that example.
And the sum of this suture is that you sew it like the sutures of skinners who sew skins: so that you sew the thread once from one side with one end of the skin: and that you let it go again on the other side, until you complete it.
The second kind of suture proper, which Galen mentioned.
His speech is recounted so that it should be done in a similar way as some physicians do, in such a manner that they bring every part to its corresponding matching counterpart by nature: and they apply the extremity of sifac to its other extremity, and the extremity of mirach to its other extremity. And that is done according to what I tell you.
You must fix the needle into the extremity of mirach nearest to you from the external part, and make it penetrate to the internal one in that alone: and let go of the two extremities of sifac. Then revolve the needle and make it penetrate from the external part to the internal one into the two extremities of sifac, namely on both sides.
Then revolve both, and also make both penetrate from the internal one up to the external one, into the other two extremities of mirach, which are on the opposite side.
And this method of suture is better than the common easy suture, and it is the suture of which previous mention was made.
This then is the speech of Galen also.
And some said. The suture of the abdomen is rectified with two needles. Which is, that you introduce one thread into both of them: and begin with the introduction of the needle, from that which is near you, and make it penetrate up to the other side, according to the suture of those who have equal skins.
And know that when the disruption is in the middle of the abdomen, then its suture is more difficult than that of the other places of the abdomen.
But judgment of treatment of a wound is judgment of other wounds.
Which is, because when you obtain a fresh wound with its own blood, before the air alters it; and you reduce the intestines and fit them to themselves: then put powdered incarnatium on top of it.
If the air has already changed the wound, then put some ointment upon it, which are present to you, until they make pus, and the filaments fall away, and the sutures become consolidated. Then treat it as the treatment of other wounds, until it is healed.
But if medicines are not present to you, then immediately put upon it, from the time it begins to discharge pus, old lint; and change it twice a day, as I have taught you, until it is healed.
For you do not need another medicine in many conditions when wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound may extend to the principal limbs in injury, then it is necessary that you immerse soft wool in oil of tempered warmth, or in rose oil, and put it around the places which are between the thighs, and under the armpits.
But if he feels pain, or punctures, or putrefaction in his bowels (for this often happens), then give him an enema with strong, black, warm wine; especially if the putrefaction has already reached the intestine and is about to penetrate as far as its cavity.
And know that what is from the large intestine is of easier healing, and what is from them of the subtle (intestine) is of more difficult healing.
The intestine which is called Jejunum does not admit healing from a wound that occurs in it at all; and this is because of its multitude (of veins), which are large, and because of the subtlety of its body, and the nearness of its nature to nerves.
But if that which proceeds from the wound is gushing forth, and you overtake it fresh, draw it back according to your reduction, by which you reduce the intestines equally.
But if a space has passed it by and it has already become green, or black, then it is necessary that you bind it with thread above the place which has been stained from it, so that bleeding may not occur. For in the hip there are veins and arteries.
Then incise what is beyond that ligament, and place two ends of a thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside it: so that its attraction is relieved upon you, and its extraction at the hip, and the discharge of pus from the wound.
Recollection of a Wound That Occurs in the Intestine.
When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible for it to be restored in some people; therefore because I have seen one who was wounded in his belly with a lance thrust, and the wound was from the right of the stomach, and the wound was old; and a fistula was made, and discharge came out of it, and flatulence.
Therefore I applied treatment until I was not doubtful of its healing; nor did I cease to refine it until he was healed and the place consolidated.
After I saw the place already consolidated, I feared for the sick man, that a bad accident might occur on his belly; and no bad accident befell him from it. And he remained in better dispositions, eating and drinking, and becoming fat, and entering the bath, and exercising in his diets.
And already some experimenters have said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it must be ligated according to this method. And it is, that you should take ants of large heads. Then bring together two lips of the wound, and place one ant from those that have an open mouth above the two lips of the wound. When its head is therefore above them and it clenches its mouth, cut off its head; for it adheres and does not loosen.
Then place another ant near the first one, and do not cease doing that with an ant after an ant according to the quantity of the whole wound.
Then reduce it and its wound. For those heads remain attached within the intestine until the intestine is eaten and healed so that no harm befalls the sick man entirely.
And now it is possible that the intestine also be ligated with a fine thread which has been drawn out from an animal's intestine and attached to it after it is introduced into the needle.
And it is so that you take the extremity of this thread from the intestine and it be pared down greatly. Then bind at its end a fine linen thread wound around. Then introduce that thread into the needle and with it the intestine. Then reduce it into the rupture.
And this method of suture with ants and intestine is not except according to the way of trust and hope.
Know that a wound which is large and wide especially if it is in one of the slender intestines then there is no remedy except refinement and there is altogether no healing of it.
On the care of fistulas and fissures
Know that every wound or abscess when it grows old and becomes ancient and turns into an ulcer and does not become firm and emits pus always and is not cut off then it is called universally a fistula no matter in what limb it may be and we call it zuchemen.
And a fistula indeed according to truth is a knotted filtration, hard, white with which there is no pain and which has the concavity of a bird's feather and on account of that some call it risati that is a feather.
And it is moist in certain hours which emits pus. And perhaps the moisture splits open in certain hours. And sometimes this moisture is much and sometimes little and it is thick and sometimes subtle.
And I have already set forth above when I spoke of wounds that every sore which does not heal and flesh is not born in it is not due except to one of the novel causes
One of these is because of the small amount of blood in the body or because of its bad nature or because there is tough flesh between it and its lips preventing the birth of flesh or because it has much filth and dirtiness or because there is a putrid ulcer in it and the matter sent to it is of bad quality or because the medicine is unsuitable for its treatment or because there is a falling corruption in the region which is a kind of pestilence, or by the nature of the region as happens in Caesaraugusta in which digestion of illnesses is difficult and healing of abscesses is delayed by nature; or because it has one bone or a number of bones.
And I have already shown all these causes and their signs, and their treatments with medicines in division; and it is necessary here to make you know the treatment of Fistula and Zuken, which is done by the way of operation with the hand.
Know therefore that a Fistula occurs in all the members of the body. For from them are Fistulas which reach the large veins and arteries, or nerves, or sinews; or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to one of the ribs; or to one of the vertebrae of the back, or to one of the joints composed in composition; such as the hand, and foot; and from them are those which go to the proximity of the principal member, and similar ones.
Which therefore of these Fistulas is according to this manner, is from illnesses difficult of healing, and does not receive a cure, and dealing with it is toil and ignorance.
But if it is from Fistulas some of whose depth does not reach these places which I said; and you hope, and trust in its cure, and wish to come to the knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron, or steel, if the Fistula tends according to straightness, and inquire into it with it.
But if there is crookedness in the Fistula, then investigate it with a probe of thin lead. Since lead is softened by the gentleness of its own body and bends around its crookedness.
If a fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to mark upon it with a probe. Therefore cleanse out from among its openings one opening.
For the moisture with which you cleanse it flows towards the other openings and runs out of them.
Then carefully inquire in what way it is possible for you to know that there is a bone or a nerve and whether the fistula's cavity is distant or near; or whether it is a single fistula which has many openings, and stand upon the whole of it with all your strength, inquiring of the sick person and finding pain by compression with your hand upon the place, and similar signs and causes arising from an abscess.
Therefore when you have stood upon all this true station, then go to the cure with confidence and consider then whether the fistula is near and apparent or in a healthy place far from a joint or a nerve or an artery or a vein or one of the places which I told you: then cut the fistula according to what has been previously said in my account and remove what is in it by filtration and corrupted flesh which arises at its opening from flesh or pus and similar things and treat it until it heals.
But if the fistula is of distant depth and according to straightness: then it is necessary that you cut it deep as much as it is possible for you. Then clean it from all its corrupted flesh.
Then apply linen wrapped in sharp medicines and introduce it up to the cavity of the fistula which you comprehended with an iron; do this several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that remains in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
Then restore it with ointments which generate healthy flesh until it heals.
If it does not heal by this means, then cauterize it according to what we have described.
Therefore if the cause of the fistula is bone and it is confirmed with you, then examine it yourself and cut it according to what I have told you; if nothing prevents you from a vein, or a nerve, or a principal member as we said.
If therefore bone is revealed to you and there is something of corruption and blackness in it, then scrape it out until all its corruption is removed. Then care for it with that which causes it to flesh, until it heals.
But if it does not heal and emits pus as it was doing, then know that you have not reached the total eradication of the corruption.
Therefore expose it again a second time and make a precise incision into it, and cleanse it with your utmost strength.
Then restore it. If therefore it heals, that is good; and if not, then know that the corruption is in a distant depth of the body, which you have not reached. Therefore there is no skill for you except to leave it to nature.
But if the bone is small and corrupted and it is possible for you, draw it out with fine forceps that are suitable for it.
But if there are many bones, then make a precise extraction of them all and do not leave any with your strength.
If something from the humors opposes you and there is no fear or error in their incision then cut into those humors and flesh if they are there and free the bones.
But if you do not have preparation for removing the bones from your time then place something over the wound so that it putrifies it and leave it until what is around those bones from flesh and humors putrefies.
And watch the wound so that it does not consolidate. And let the incision which you have made in your operation be constricted. If you are afraid, place on it a cotton wool soaked in sulfur ground with oil; or cotton wool soaked in Egyptian ointment, or some green ointments.
For when those humidities, to wit, putrefy and the bones are separated from them, their removal is eased, and their attraction as well.
But if there is one large bone, such as the bone of the leg, or the bone of the hip, and similar to those, and that which has become corrupted from it is a large part; then scrape it with the last rasp until that blackness and corruption are removed. Then restore the wound.
But if what is corrupted in it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to saw it, and to cut it all the way to the place where the corruption reaches; then care for it until it consolidates.
And I tell you a story of a man who had a wound on his leg: so that you may place it as an example and help for your operation.
There was a young man of about thirty years of age to whom there came pain in his leg, from a cause which was moved upon him within the body, that is, from within, until the materials reached the leg, and it became inflamed with a large abscess; and he had no external cause.
Time therefore was extended with him in error of the physicians until the abscess was opened and many materials gathered with it. And his treatment was postponed until his leg became fistulous and many openings were made in it; which all emitted pus and the humidities of the body.
Therefore a multitude of physicians treated him for about two years and there was no wise man in the art of the hand until I was called and I saw his leg and the materials which were flowing from those openings with great flow: even the whole body of the man had already wasted, and his color was yellow.
Therefore insert a probe into one of the openings and let it reach the mouth.
Then I examined all the openings and found that they all led to one another from all parts of the leg.
I hastened and cut above one of these openings until I exposed a part of bone; and I found it decayed, for it was corroded and blackened and putrid and pierced through until it reached the marrow.
Therefore I sawed off what was revealed to me and prepared it from the decayed bone.
And I determined that there was nothing in the bone except that corruption which I cut off and sawed. And I had now eradicated it.
Then I placed the restoration of the wound with strengthening medicines over a long space. And it did not consolidate.
Then I probed and revealed above the bone a second time above the first revelation; and I found continuous corruption with the bone; and I sawed off what appeared to me also from that corruption.
Then I tried its restoration. And it was not restored.
Therefore I revealed above it again and did not cease to cut the bone in pieces and try its restoration; and it was not restored until I cut out from the bone about a palms breadth and extracted it with its marrow.
Then I restored it with medicines and it consolidated quickly and healed; and this iteration was not necessary in its operation and section except because of the weakness of the sick man's constitution, and his lack of tolerance, and my fear for him concerning death; for he suffered from it every hour a bad fainting spell from excessive discharge.
He was therefore healed with perfect healing; and flesh grew hard in the place of the bone, and his condition became good, and his strength returned; and he returned to his usual habits; and it did him no harm at all in walking.
If however the prominent bone is already fractured in its place: it is necessary that you grasp it, in this manner: and it is: that you take a ligature and tighten it at the extremity of the prominent bone: and order someone to extend it upward: and place another ligature of thick wool above the first ligature. Then bind it above the flesh which is beneath the bone and extend its extremity so that you draw the flesh downwards and you expose the flesh over the place which you wish to saw so that the saw does not injure the flesh.
Place wood or a plank beneath the bone below decently: for when you do this, it is not prevented that it may cut corrupt flesh.
And it is necessary that the saw be over the corrupt place a little while so that there not be corruption in the concavity of the bone and that it does not appear in its appearance to the sense and compel towards the saw of its own vice another.
But if the bone is corrupt and is not prominent but rather continues its part with its part and the corruption is in its middle or in a part of it then expose all the flesh from all sides entirely. Then place wood beneath.
Afterwards saw it from the first part where the corruption is until the saw continues from the other part and let the saw be according to the length from the corruption a little while as we said.
But if the corruption is at the junction cut the corrupt junction itself and saw the bone where it continues from the other part.
But if the corruption is in the continuation of two junctions then there is no skill there except abrasion.
But if the corruption is in the bone of the hand or in the bone of the foot then the matter there is very difficult. But it is necessary that you inquire how the corruption appears to you. And abrade it and cleanse it according to whatever arrangement is possible for you and with whatever skill it is rectified for you when it does not oppose Vein or Nerve.
And know that cutting instruments and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and thinness, and size, and smallness, and hardness, and rarity. Therefore it is necessary that you prepare a suitable instrument for each type of operation.
And know that these operations signify to you the kind of instrument you need, when you have long study. And knowledge of the methods of this art, a testimony to the methods of illnesses; for then you will find by yourself what is suitable for it from instruments for every ailment.
And I affirm to you in the last part of this chapter the number of instruments, which you put as examples on which you cut, and the testing by which you try on others.
The Form of Another Saw.
The Form of a Scraper for Joints. Let the head of this scraper be according to the form of the head of a star-shaped key; and its points be according to the form of the points of an elischetfegi.
And it is not suitable unless joint heads are rubbed with it when they are corrupted, or the mouth is wide and large.
The Form of a Larger Scraper.
The Form of a Wide Scraper.
The Form of a Scraper in Which There Is a Concavity.
The Form of Another Slender Scraper.
The Form of Another Scraper with a Curved End.
The shape of a small razor, of delicate thread.
This is similar to a spoke, and its end is like a saw; it is shown in many places for the reason of bones.
The shape of a razor which suits its purpose because it is perforated from bones.
Its end is triangular, and its points are sharp.
It is made from India. And similarly, it is necessary that all which we have said be made from razors, and incisors, and saws.
On the incision of extremities, and the sawing of bones.
Limbs putrefy, either from an external or internal cause.
Therefore when you have treated that corruption with medical care, and the treatment does not work; and you see the corruption entering into a limb which nothing repels: then it is necessary to cut that limb up to where the corruption reaches so that the weak person may be saved from death or from harm which is greater by the loss of a limb.
And the sign that this happens to a limb is that it blackens until it seems burned; or it rots after the blackness: until that rot reaches what follows the limb, and spreads into the whole body.
Therefore hasten with the incision of it, and similarly if the cause of the corruption is from the sting of certain venomous creatures such as a sea scorpion, viper, weasel, and similar ones.
Therefore if the corruption or sting is in the extremity of a finger, then cut the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it advances up to the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it happens in the hand, then cut it from the root of the forearm and do not give space to the corruption until it reaches the forearm.
And if it enters into it, then cut the arm at the elbow at its joint.
But if the corruption passes through and you see it around the elbow, then death is upon the sick man there. And besides that in treatment, the quantity of virtue is to be administered.
And do the same with the foot, when the corruption enters into a toe, then cut off itself at one of the nodes; and if it seizes the arch of the foot, then cut off the entire foot. But if it ascends to the knee, then cut off the leg at the knee joint.
And if the corruption already reaches above the knee, then there is no skill in it except dismissal and leaving the sick man to death.
And the method of cutting off a limb or binding it is to tie a ligature below the place where you wish to cut; and tie another ligature above the place. And let one attendant extend the lower ligature downward; and let another attendant extend the upper ligature upward. And you separate the flesh that is between the two ligatures with a broad spatula until all the flesh is exposed. Then cut or bind it.
And it is necessary that you put linen cloths on all sides, and the saw does not touch the healthy part;  and let the sick man have an added injury, and a warm poultice.
But if internal bleeding occurs while you are operating, then cauterize the place quickly; or put some powders that staunch bleeding on top of it. Then return to your treatment until it is completed.
Then bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage for it and care for it until it heals.
And I tell you that it happened to a man in his foot, the same thing that I tell you.
Because blackness occurred in his foot, with a burn that resembles fire; and that corruption first happened to his toe until it began to spread to the whole foot.
Therefore, a man recovered from himself after he saw the corruption fall into the member with its violence, which he found from pain and its burning; and it befell at the joint, and it was healed.
And after a long time passed him, that same corruption befell him in the index finger of his hand.
He came to me then, and I tried to recover that excess with what I placed upon his hand from medicines after the purification of his body; and the excess was not repulsed, and it began to proceed into another finger: until the corruption began in the hand.
He therefore called upon me to cut his hand; and I did not want that, hoping from myself on the repulsion of that excess; and I also feared for him at the cutting of his hand death. For the virtue of the man was above the chance.
Afterward therefore he despaired of me, he returned to his land; and there reached me about him that he recovered, and he cut off his whole hand; and he was healed.
And I did not bring this account except that it may be a help upon that which falls of this kind of illness; and that there may be a meaning by which it is signified and according to which it is acted.
Concerning the cure of Sinuses, and the quality of clystering with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in certain fleshy members, and the space of the abscess extends, until it makes a collection of pus; then it breaks or is perforated, and what is in it goes out as pus, and a vacant place remains as if it were a vessel: and the skin which is upon it like a cloth that has already been thinned; and it does not reach its ultimate corruption, nor press into the mouth, nor into a nerve, nor into a ligament: it deserves to be called a Sinus, and not a Fistula. However, if the space of it extends until the corruption presses into any one of these members, then it is called a Fistula, or a zuken.
And the care of it is, that you should cut all of its skin just as it turns over; and especially when it has been thinned and made like cloth; and you trust that it will not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
But if you hope that the skin will adhere and that last corruption does not follow from it; and if there is a thickness in the skin from flesh, then care for it with a clyster; and it is as if you were to direct it towards the Sinus.
Then if it is large, and the pus that is emitted from it has a foul odor; then clysterize it with Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar and oil and ziniar, taking equal parts, are gathered in a vase; and they are decocted over fire until the medicine reddens; and comes to a thickness of honey.
Then take from it what is necessary for you; and dissolve it with water and honey, and clysterize the Sinus with it; and constrict its orifice, and let the medicine remain in it for the quantity of two hours.
Then extract it with expression; do that for so many days until the Sinus is cleansed and the stench is removed.
And sometimes it is clysterized with ash water when this medicine is not present for you; and it is as if you should take ash from vine wood, or ash from holly wood; and pour water over it. Then strain it and clysterize with it until you trust that the Sinus has already been washed.
But if the weak person does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor ash water, then clysterize it with water and honey to which something already mixed from ground ziniar has been added. Or clysterize it with honey and wine mixed together, since honey's property is to cleanse and wash; and the wine makes the Sinus adhere, especially when there is an excess of astringency and dryness in the wine.
When you have done this several times and are confident that the sinus corruption has already been removed, then give him an enema with something which promotes the growth of flesh in it.
And take diaphycon plaster and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine; or give him an enema with certain drugs and other ointments the properties of which I have written in the treatise on ointments.
But if the sinus opening is narrow and will not admit the enema cannula, then widen it a little with an iron instrument; or place in it a licorice stick wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basil ointment until it is enlarged.
And similarly if the opening is wide, then bring together its lips with sutures and allow from it a quantity into which the enema may enter without addition.
And similarly if the opening from which pus flows is raised to a higher place, then dry it in a lower depression within it so that the pus may flow downwards; for when pus is confined in the depth of the sinus it prevents flesh from growing there.
But if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus around its lower part according to your desire, then try to prepare the limb with a preparation so that the pus flows from it easily according to what is prepared for you. Try that nothing of the pus be retained in it at all; and take consolidating medicines which are placed over a sign suitable for what you desire. And spread them on linen cloth. And let the cloth be of such a quantity that it makes contact with the whole sinus. Then cut with forceps a hole directly into the sinus opening, somewhat larger than the sinus opening. Then spread some soothing ointments on another cloth according to the size of the hole and place it over the first cloth at a distance from the sinus opening so that the discharge of pus is relieved; and do not remove the large cloth except after several days at once.
He who is above the Sinus opening is he whom you remove every hour so that what collects in it from pus may exit; and so that you may know whether what flows from it is much or little; digested or undigested.
And again consider with this the place of the Sinus itself, whether its master feels pain in it or not, and whether there is an abscess in it or not.
Therefore when your treatment proceeds thus and you see the matter which exits above the Sinus opening, then you know that the Sinus is already adhering or approaching adhesion; then loosen it in the morning or on the third day; and when you loosen the wound, then change another cloth and renew the ointment.
But if thin pus flows from the Sinus after a long time, then do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is approaching, since there are some men who delay the generation of flesh in their wounds and there are some who act contrary to that.
But if undigested pus flows from the Sinus after many days, then you know that the sinus is not adhering.
Therefore if the adhesion of the Sinus is delayed and its matter is prolonged; then add to the drying medicines, as physicians truly do, so that the medicines are moist in their substance and dry in their power: such as dyafinicon ointment when an excess of addition from zegi is added to it.
And the last of all by which it is cured is that you take dyafinicon ointment and dissolve it with rose oil and pour old wine equal to it in substance over it.
Then mix it well with it and use it.
And now honey acts similarly to this action when you do not have dyafinicon ointment present; boil it until it thickens and use it. Or take myrrh, aloe, and frankincense; grind the whole thing and sprinkle it over honey while it is on the fire. Then lay a linen cloth over it, and bind it tight over the Sinus; and anoint it with honey which you have boiled down until it is thick; and sprinkle powdered spices over it, and put a linen cloth over it, and bind it.
And sometimes long birthwort is administered with it, and roots of blue lily, and lily, and herb flour, and centaury. Use them simply or mixed, grind them, and sift them; and sprinkle them over the honey which I have described, and use it.
And if the Sinus condition persists and does not heal with this treatment, then know that there is corruption deep within it; or it is already making an impression on the bones, or on the other hard members, or ligaments: then treat it with a treatment for Fistulas, according to what has been stated previously.
On the treatment of whitlow and nail abrasion, and incision of an added finger, and sectioning.
Whitlow is an abscess which arises under the nail of the thumb of the hand or foot; and perhaps it arises in the other fingers.
And therefore when the matter of it persists, and its cure is neglected, and it becomes inflamed with a hot abscess; or it corrupts and emits pus until it corrodes the root of the nail; and perhaps it corrupts the whole of it, and perhaps the corruption reaches the bone until it has a foul smell; and the end of the finger becomes wide, and its color becomes dark.
Therefore when you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and your treatment does not take effect; then it is necessary that you cut with an instrument the whole excess which remains from the nail. Then cauterize the wound after that. For cautery is very helpful.
But if the bone is sound, and the nail is also sound, and the added empty parts of the nail already press the flesh inwards, and begin to prick it, and injure it: then it is necessary that you place a thin Radium under the angle of the nail which pricks the flesh, and push it upwards; and cut the flesh easily, and put over what remains of the flesh medicines that burn and corrode until all of it is removed. Then care for it with ointments until it heals.
But if corruption has already set in the bone, then it is necessary that you cut into that bone and extract it: for it will never heal as long as a corrupted bone remains within it.
But if you see corrosion and corruption advancing into the finger, then cut it at one of its joints, according to what was previously mentioned about it. Then care for it until it heals.
But if it should happen that there is attrition or percussion to the nail, and there is a sharp pain in it, then it is necessary first to let blood from a weak person. Then cut the nail with a sharp spatulum in a transverse section from above downward.
And be careful that the incision does not reach the flesh which is beneath the nail, for you will cause a very sharp pain through it and it will be a reason for added inflammation of the flesh in the place.
Then care for the area with that which soothes pains.
Indeed the added finger which is born in some men's hands, perhaps it is all flesh; and perhaps there are bones in some of them; and perhaps a nail exists in it: and some of them are born at the root of the joint, or its origin is in some joints of the finger. That which is born in some joints of the finger does not move; and that which is born at the joint of the finger perhaps moves.
Therefore the incision of that which is fleshy from them is easy. That is, you should cut it at its root with a broad spatulum.
But the treatment of that whose origin is in the root of the joint is difficult. Therefore abstain from cutting it.
But in that which is born on the finger at the last joint, then it is necessary that you first cut its flesh with a round incision down to the bone. Then a saw with one of those saws suitable for it. Then care for it until it heals.
Moreover, consolidation which occurs between the fingers often happens either from the birth of man, that is, he is born with it, or from the consolidation of a wound, or from burning by fire, and similar things.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form. Then place cloths between them soaked in rose oil so that they do not consolidate quickly and separate them, or place a thin sheet of lead between them until the place consolidates as it should.
And similarly if consolidation occurs with certain fingers and the palm, then cut that consolidation according to what is prepared and suits the shape of the limb.
On the Incision of a Vice.
Varices are veins enveloped, thick, full of superfluous melancholic humors which occur in many members of the body; and most often their outcome is in the legs, especially in the legs of those who travel and work, and carry things.
Therefore, it is necessary that you administer exercise of the body from black bile several times with vigorous shaking.
Then phlebotomy for the patient to those who are basil-like.
The treatment of them with iron is according to two methods. One of them is that they are cut and black blood is extracted. And the other method is that a vein is lifted and the whole thing is extracted.
The section of it is according to this method. First embrocate the leg with plenty of hot water until the thick fecal blood is resolved. Then bind the leg of the sick person from the upper part of his hip down to the lower part of the knee with a bandage. Then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three with a wide incision.
Then raise, that is, draw out the blood into your hand from the lower part of the leg, up to the top, and the phlebotomist must first weaken the one above. Then cut the vein all the way down until a quantity of blood comes out which you see to be sufficient and which the strength of the sick person can tolerate.
Then tie it off and instruct him to abstain from foods that produce black bile; and repeat the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full and it harms the sick person.
The raising of it is according to this method. Shave the leg of the sick person if there are many hairs on it. Then immerse him in a bath or embrocate his leg with warm water until it reddens and the veins swell; or he should be exercised vigorously if there is no bath available for him until the limb is heated.
Then cut the skin directly over the vein lengthwise; or at its end near the knee, or in its lower part near the heel.
Then open the skin with hooks and expose the vein from all sides until it appears to the senses; and at its appearance you will see it reddish towards a dark decline. When therefore it comes out of the skin, you will see it white as if it were a cord.
Then insert a cannula under it until it rises and comes out of the skin; suspend it with a blunt hook, gentle.
Then cut another incision near that incision by three fingers. Then expose the skin from the upper part of the vein until it appears. Then raise it with cannulas as you did and suspend it with another hook as you did first.
Then dry another incision, or several incisions, if necessary. Then elevate it and cut it with the last incision at the heel.
Then draw it out to the incision which is above it.
And do that until you draw it out from the incision which is above, or higher than all the incisions, until it comes out whole; then cut it.
But if it does not obey you to be drawn out and elevated: then introduce a needle with a strong double thread, and tie it, and draw it out; or introduce a Radium under it, and revolve your hand in every direction until it comes out. And be careful that it is not cut. For if it is cut, it becomes difficult for you to elevate it greatly, and harm enters upon the weak part from it.
When therefore you have drawn it all out: then place wool soaked in wine and rose oil, or oil over the place of the wound; and care for it until it is healed.
But if the Vine is contracted, having a twist with an involution towards its parts, and it is not as we said according to straightness: then it is necessary that you split it over all the parts of its twist, and the places of its own involution.
Then suspend it with hooks until you raise it all; and be careful at your incision over it that you do not cut a vein, or wound it: for it will become difficult for you to raise, or draw it out. Therefore preserve your prudence.
The Form of the Falling Vine by which it is Healed.
The Form of a Blind Vine.
It does not have a curvature like the other Hooks, nor an acute extremity, so that it would not wound a vein; and it is of a thick, gentle flexuousity; for if it were slender, it would cut the vein by its slenderness: but let its thickness be excessive, as we said.
On the Extraction of a Leg Vein.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot lands, such as Alizegi and the land of the Arabs, and in dry, hot lands of little tenderness, that is, those in which neither herb nor tree grows.
And perhaps it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And its generation is indeed from putrefaction which occurs under the skin, just as serpents and ascaris worms occur within bodies, and worms generated between the skin and flesh.
And the sign of the beginning of this vein's event is that a violent inflammation occurs in the leg. Then the place blisters. Then the vein begins to come out from the place of that blistering, as if it were the root of a plant, or an animal.
When therefore its extremity appears from it, then it is necessary that you wrap upon it a piece of lead, whose weight is from one scruple to two scruples and bind it: and let the lead hang suspended from the leg.
Whenever therefore anything exits from it to the outside, wrap that in the lead and bind it. If it lengthens much, then cut a part of it and wrap up the remainder. And do not cut it out entirely before it comes out completely. For if you cut it, it contracts and enters into the flesh, and causes an abscess to occur, and putrefaction in the place, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore it is necessary that it be handled gently and extracted gradually until it comes out from its last part, and nothing remains of it in the body: and from this vein indeed, there exits in some men what is in its length five palms and ten. And now it has come to me that it came out of a man from twenty palms.
But if it should happen to you during your time of treatment: then introduce a ray into its hole, and perforate it with a long hole, with a body, until all that is in it from matter is evacuated: and administer putrefaction of the place with medicines for several days. Then care for it with treatment for abscesses.
And indeed this Vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the junction of the foot, or in the foot itself: and it happens to have many openings, and a branch comes out from every opening.
Care for it therefore as we said in the division, and with that which has been said before.
Concerning the incision over Worms generated under the skin, and it is called bovine disease.
This disease is named in a certain land among us bovine disease: because it often happens to oxen, and there is a small worm, which is born between the skin and flesh.
And it wanders in the whole body, ascending and descending: and it is shown to the senses during its locomotion of a limb to a limb, until it breaks wherever it breaks in the skin, and comes out.
And its generation is from the putrefaction of certain humors. Just as worms and snakes happen, that is, earthworms, and roundworms in the belly.
And it is feared from its malice. Because when it itself wanders in the body, and rises to the head, and reaches a place: then perhaps it opens in it, and comes out, and destroys the eye: and that happens very often.
When therefore you wish to cure it, and extract it, then it is not done except at its locomotion, and appearance to the senses.
Therefore, it is necessary to tie what is above it and what is below it with a strong ligature constriction. Then cut above it and extract it.
But if it is buried deep in the flesh and you cannot find it, then place a cautery with fire upon the spot until it dies.
And the greater thing that is feared is its corruption, by which it corrupts the eye, as we said.
But if you see that it has already reached the head near the eye, then constrict the eyebrow well above it. Then cut above it and extract it.
And it is necessary that the weak person use cleansing of their body with medicines that dissolve foul and bad humors.
And let them beware of foods that generate putrefaction.
Concerning the cutting for the ailment Nakir.
This ailment is called Nakir in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in certain limbs, and then it changes from limb to limb.
And I myself have indeed already seen it, according to what I tell you. I was summoned to a weak woman in certain boils. And she exposed her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the brachioradialis muscle.
And after I remained for an hour, I saw one swelling advance with a focus, just as a worm advances, ascending to her shoulder faster than is possible: so that it was like molten silver when it runs from place to place.
Therefore the pain receded from that place and became fixed in her shoulder.
Then I sat for an hour, and it ran through the rest of the body until it reached the other arm.
Then she told me that it was revolving throughout her whole body, according to what I saw.
Therefore I have been amazed at the speed of its transfer from limb to limb. And for my part, before that I had never seen this ailment with my own eyes in such a manner. However, I have seen many who find pain transferred from limb to limb: and I did not see it myself with my eyes as I saw it in this woman.
And I do not think that this is so except because the woman was one of those from whom dry bodies with exposed veins are detected: therefore, this perceived windiness transferred here appears.
And it is necessary that they do not appear according to this reasoning in those who are delicate and with moist bodies, hidden veins.
When therefore you desire its cure and the patient feels that pain: then if it is apparent to you by eye, as we have said, then bind above it and below it quickly; and cut above it until that constricted windiness goes out; and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it with your own eyes: then treat it with shaking of the body and with that which expels windiness and drives them away with foul-smelling pills and pills from lizard's tail and similar things.
On the Extraction of Arrows.
Arrows are diversified according to their kinds and according to the places in which they fall from the body.
Their diversity is indeed because some of them have large points and small ones: and concave ones and blunt ones. And some of them have three angles. And some of them which have tongues. And some of them which have stars.
Those indeed which are according to the limbs in which they fall are according to two manners. For either the limbs are from the principal concave limbs such as the brain, and heart, and liver, and lung, and kidneys, and intestines, and bladder, and those similar to them. Therefore, when it falls into any of these members, and the signs of death appear to you, which I will tell you after, then it is necessary that you avoid the extraction of that arrow from them, for death follows him in whom it is, in many dispositions. And when these evil signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then extract it, and care for the wound.
For among the signs of the brain when an arrow falls into it and penetrates the mouth and exits through the siphac which is above the brain, there is: because vehement soda and scotoma and vertigo and redness in the eyes and inflation and redness of the tongue and spasm and mixing of intellect and vomiting of cholera occur from it. And perhaps blood exits from the nostrils or ears. And perhaps speech is cut off and the voice is destroyed. And humidity white like poultice exits from the place of the wound. And a likeness of the aqueousness of flesh exits from it.
If therefore these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment and extract the arrow if it does not exit.
But the signs of an arrow when it falls into the heart are: that it is near the left nipple and he feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not in a hollow thing. And perhaps there is motion of the arrow similar to the motion of the pulse and black blood runs from the wound. And coldness of the extremities follows, and cold sweat and fainting. Know therefore that death descends without doubt.
And the sign of an arrow when it has wounded the lung is the exit of frothy blood from the wound and the vessels which follow the neck become inflamed and the color of the sick person changes. And he breathes out a great, deep spirit and seeks the attraction of cold air.
If an arrow should fall into the membrane which is in the chest: then it is near the small ribs: and there is great panting with vehement pain, with a sigh: and all the members of the shoulders are moved.
And if an arrow should fall into the stomach, then perhaps some undigested food may come out of the wound.
And if an arrow should fall into the belly, and is fixed therein: some dung may come out of the wound, or phlegm, or intestine which has already been ruptured. Therefore there is no hope in its cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if an arrow should fall into the bladder, and urine should come out: and something proceeds from it to the outside, and the pain is stronger on the weak: then know that it is mortal.
But the remaining members, such as the face, and neck, and throat, and scapula, and armpit, and vertebrae of the back, and collarbone, and thigh, and leg, and those similar to these members are saved according to many dispositions: when the arrow does not find an artery, or a nerve: and the arrow is not poisoned.
And I tell you what I have seen concerning the being of these arrows, so that you may know through it concerning your cure.
Which is this: because to a certain man an arrow fell into the tear duct of his eye, at the root of the nose. Therefore I extracted it from him on the other side, under the fat of his ear: and he was healed, and no harm befell his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had fallen to him in the fat of his eye under the lower eyelid: and the arrow was already concealed, and I did not obtain anything from it except a small part of it, with which it adheres to its wood: and it was a large arrow from the arrows of Turkish bows, with soft iron, in which there are no ears.
Therefore, the Jew was healed, and no evil accident befell his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And it was an Arabic arrow, and it is one that has ears. I therefore cut above it between two guideges, and it was already submerged in his throat. I therefore proceeded carefully with it until I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man which had fallen into his belly, and we thought that he would die from it.
After thirty days had passed him, and nothing changed in his condition, I cut above the arrow, I devised a plan with regard to it, and extracted it; and he was healed, and no evil accident befell him.
And I saw a man to whom an arrow had fallen on his back, and the wound had become consolidated over it. After therefore seven years had passed, the arrow came out at the root of his hip.
And I saw a woman to whom an arrow had fallen in her belly, and the wound had become consolidated over it, and the arrow remained inside her: and nothing changed in her condition, and the woman did not find harm from it in any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow had fallen on his face: and the wound had become consolidated, and it remained, not finding him much pain; and similar things to these, many.
And I extracted an arrow from a man of the King's princes, which had fallen to him in the middle of his nose, and it had already inclined towards the right side a little; and the whole arrow was concealed.
I was therefore called for his treatment three days after the fall of the arrow. I therefore found the wound of the arrow very tight.
Therefore I examined it with a delicate probe, and did not feel it; and he himself was finding the puncture and pain under his right ear. Therefore I hoped that it was that puncture from the end of the arrow.
I therefore plastered the place with a plaster in which there was an attractive and digestive power, confident within myself that the place would become abscessed and the sign of the arrow would appear to me so that I could cut above it; and it did not happen in the place any accident indicating that the arrow had reached the place.
I therefore persisted with the plaster upon him for many days; and no accident happened, and the wound meanwhile became consolidated; and he remained weak from its extraction over a period of days, until he felt the arrow on a certain day inside his nose. And he related that to me.
And he related that to me. I therefore put upon that wound a sharp, corrosive medicine for many days, until it opened; and when I probed it, I felt the slender extremity of the arrow adhering to the wood.
Then I added to the opening of the wound through that sharp medicine until the extremity of the arrow appeared visibly to us; and it passed for me with him approximately a space of time of four months.
Then after the wound had been enlarged and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it and move it, and it did not obey its exit; then I did not cease to refine and contrive upon it with ways of ingenuity until I began upon it on a certain day with forceps neatly made, according to which their form will come at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it. Then I restored the wound.
And physicians indeed judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored. I therefore restored it, and the wound became consolidated, and he was healed with complete health; nor did anything harm him at all.
And I tell you the quality of extracting certain arrows: so that you put that rule and meaning upon that which I did not say.
For the parts of this art and their distinctions are not comprehended with narration; nor does this book comprehend it, and a prudent craftsman compares with little upon much; and with that which is present, upon that which is absent; and he finds a new operation, and a new instrument at the descents of foreign matters of this art when they happen.
I say, therefore, that arrows do not depart from the limbs in which they are fixed except according to two ways. Or by attraction from the place from whence it entered. Or contrary to the other part.
And that which departs whence it entered, either is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy place; and it is attracted and departs.
And if it does not obey to exit at the hour in which it falls: then it is necessary that you dismiss it for several days until the flesh which is in its circumference putrefies; and the attraction of it is relieved, and its exit.
And similarly if it is fixed in bone, and does not obey you to exit, then dismiss it also for several days; and repeat it with attraction and motion every day until it departs.
And if it does not obey you to exit after days, then it is necessary that you pierce in the circumference of the arrow in the very bone from every part with a fine awl until the arrow is enlarged. Then attract it and draw it out.
But if the arrow is already hidden in the body and concealed from the senses, then seek it out with your hand. If you feel it, then draw it out with certain instruments that are suitable for its attraction.
But if you cannot get hold of it because of the tightness of the wound and the length of the arrow deep inside, and there is neither a bone nor a nerve nor a vein there, then cut above it until the wound is enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if it has ears by which to hold it, then free the flesh fixed in them from every side with all the skill you can, and be ingenious, if it is not possible for the flesh to escape in the fracture of the ears and twisting them until it does escape.
And when you are performing the extraction of an arrow, wherever it may be, then use twisting of your hand with forceps on all sides until you make it come out, and with subtle finesse at the very end so that the arrow is not broken and its attraction and extraction become difficult for you.
And if you cannot get it out within an hour, then leave it for several days until what is around it becomes putrid. Then repeat the process, for then it will be relieved. But if a flow of blood opposes you, then administer what we said about treatment in its chapter and guard your strength from cutting a vein, nerve, or cord.
And administer skill in every way possible for the escape of the arrow, and let it be with ease and tranquility, or slowness and firmness as I have described to you.
And it is necessary that you make, when you draw out an arrow, that it be weak according to the shape in which it was at the time of the arrow wound itself. Because it is more beneficial. But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you from the shapes.
An arrow which departs from the opposite side, or has already proceeded from it something to the outside; or makes a hump at the end of the arrow by feeling from the upper part of the nearby skin, and you see it protruding: cut therefore above it, and let the incision be according to the amount that forceps can grasp in it.
Then draw it out; for it itself becomes easy for removal.
But if it is held fast in bone, then twist your hand according to the roundness until the arrow imprints in the bone and enlarges itself; then draw it out.
And if not: leave it for several days; then repeat it until it comes out.
But if the wood of the arrow is in it, then drive it in with that.
But if the wood has fallen out, and you wish to administer driving: then introduce a concave instrument to it so that its concavity enters the tail of the arrow; then drive it in with that.
But if the arrow is concave, then drive it in with an instrument entering into it. For the arrow is relieved by that.
But if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary that you scoop out all the flesh in which the poison is: if that is possible for you. Then treat it with what suits that.
But if an arrow falls into the chest, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side; and it is nearby from what you touch with your hand, and it is possible for you to cut above it: then cut, and beware of cutting a vein, or nerve, and draw it out.
Then treat your wound, if you see it, and care for it until it heals.
And this is the form of forceps, with which arrows are extracted.
Let the extremities be like a bird's beak, which are made like iron: when they grasp the arrow, they do not let it go.
And many kinds are made from them, large and small and medium, according to the size of the arrow, its slenderness, the width of the wound, and its tightness.
The shape of the impellent is concave.
And the shape of the deaf impellent.
This is a deaf extremity like a ray so that its entrance may be eased into the concave arrow and it is propelled with it.
Concerning the Phlebotomy of Veins.
Veins to be phlebotomized, whose course is customary in the body, are thirty.
Of these there are sixteen in the head: two pulsating veins which are behind the ears, called two Herbs; and two Arteries which appear in the two temples; and two Veins which are in the tear ducts of the two eyes, called Gazing; and a prepared vein in the middle of the forehead; and a vein at the end of the nose. And two Guidegis which are in the neck. And two veins which are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins which are in the lower lip. And these are the veins called Algecherich. And two veins which are under the tongue.
But the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are five veins in each arm.
One of them is Cephalic and it is from the sylvan side; and the common people call it the vein of the head. And Brown. And it is the Middle vein and it is composed of a branch of the Basilic and a branch of the Cephalic; and the common people call it the vein of the body. And Basilic, and it is placed on the domestic side; and it is also called Tittillicaris. And the common people call it the vein of the belly. And Cord of the Arm, and it is placed above the fossa; and it is that in which one lets blood, and it is that which appears above the thumb with a manifest protrusion.
And Saluatella; and it is a vein which is between the annular and the little finger; and it has two branches.
And in the thigh and in the foot there are three veins. One of them is that which is under the curvature of the thumb from the sylvan side. And the second is Saphenous; and its location is at the heel from the domestic side. And the Nesse vein; and its location is at the heel from the sylvan side.
And in the other thigh there are three veins similar to those.
Concerning bloodletting of two veins behind the Ears.
Bloodletting indeed of the two veins which are behind the ears is beneficial for old catarrhs and hemiplegia and apoplexy and old bad ulcers of the head.
And the quality of bloodletting from them is according to what I relate. And it is that the head of the sick person be shaved; and his occiput be rubbed in the place of the two veins with a rough cloth with good rubbing. Then let the sick person bind his neck with a band until the two veins appear. And their locations are behind the ears in two depressed places on the head. Therefore inquire for them with your finger, and where you feel their pulse under your finger, mark there with a cautery.
Then take a lancet-type phlebotomy knife, which is called the Incidens. Then insert it under the vein in the skin until the phlebotomy knife reaches the mouth of the vein. Then raise your hand with the vein and skin upwards, and cut into the vein and skin with an incidental incision. And let the length of the incision be the size of two joined fingers, or thereabouts; and let as much blood flow out as you wish.
Then bind it with lint, and let it go until it heals.
And now the incision of them has preceded at the beginning of the book, and their cauterization.
The phlebotomy of the two arteries which are in the two temples is beneficial for an old migraine: and chronic gout; and persistent ophthalmia: and a course of sharp, overflowing superfluities to the eyes.
And the quality of phlebotomizing them is as I tell you. Let the weak person bend their neck a lot until two veins appear clearly to the sense and their pulse is shown under your finger. Then mark them with a cautery.
Then raise the skin above the vein upwards with your index finger and insert the incidental phlebotomy knife underneath, and raise the vein upwards. And cut into it as you did with the other two veins; and let as much blood flow out according to your need.
Then release the constriction of the weak person, and place your finger on the vein for an hour. Then place a dressing and cotton on it, and bind it tightly above with a strong ligature; and leave it until it heals.
And the recollection of these has already preceded, and their incision and extraction at the beginning of the book.
The advantage of venesection of the frontal vein is after venesection of the cephalic vein, for old facial ailments: and for hemiplegia, and redness: and foul ulcers.
And the quality of that venesection is as I tell you. Let the sick person tie their neck with a band until the vein appears. Then take an instrument called a fossa.
Place the prominent point which is at the head of the fossa upon the vein itself and strike it with a comb, or some other thing in that manner; and let the blood flow according to the amount you wish. Then loosen the perforation of the sick person and bind it until it heals.
And sometimes it is opened with a wide venesection. However it should not be of an acute point like the other venesections, but rather of a wide point. And let the venesection be transverse; because the mouth is nearby and perhaps the venesection will break when it is thin.
The advantage of the two veins which are in the two lachrymals of the two eyes is for an eye afflicted with scabies and redness; and a sebaceous cyst in the eye, and facial ailments.
And the quality of their venesection is such that the sick person should tie their neck with a band. Then let blood-letting be done to them: and you shall stand above their head.
Let the blood-letting be made across the length, a little, with a small lancet, a little wide, for there is not much flesh in the place. For if the lancet is too fine, perhaps it will break.
Then let as much blood run out as is necessary for you. And put a compress over them, and bind them up at night with one binding, and undo them.
But blood-letting of the veins of the nose is fitting for acute fever and vehement soda and illnesses of the face, such as headache, and redness which happens in the face; especially when it is old.
And the quality of its blood-letting is that a weak person should constrict their own neck. Then hold their nose with your left hand, and take a fine, long lancet; and fix it in the middle of the hare itself, between that which separates the nose according to straightness. For the vein does not appear to the sense there, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary that you hold your hand with the lancet for a little while; and let as much blood run out according to your need. Then bind it up at night with one binding. For it is restored quickly.
But the benefit of blood-letting of the two temples is for constriction of the breath and beginning of leprosy and melancholic illnesses and impetigo and bad ulcers and corroding ones, that is, summer boils.
The quality of their phlebotomy is such that the weak person should be strapped under both arms in his neck with a bandage; and the craftsman should stand above the head of the weak person, and the weak person should be sitting on a seat.
Then the phlebotomist makes a slightly wider cut in the vein according to the length of the desired phlebotomy. Then extract a temperate amount of blood, or according to that which you see is necessary for it. Then do the same from another vein.
Afterwards loosen the bandage and constrict two veins in the middle: so that the weak person does not suffer a relapse. And let him go until morning. For the wound will heal.
Concerning the Phlebotomy of the Veins by Albucasis Veins, however, are beneficial for phlebotomy according to Albucasis because they contribute to alcohol in the mouth and corruption of the gums; and bad ulcers; and fissures of the lips, and bad ulcers, even those that are in the nose and around it.
And the quality of their phlebotomy is such that you should make the weak person sit before you and constrict his neck with a band. Then turn back his lip and look at two veins; of which one is on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of both is by the blackness of both. And this is true: because around them are small, black veins. Therefore, cut into both with an incidental incision.
But if there is doubt upon you and you do not know which of them it is: then attend to the incision of the larger of them and the more manifest.
And do the same with the two veins that are in the upper lip; and indeed, most customarily this is done; and cut into the two veins that are in the lower lip.
On Phlebotomy: Of the Vein under the Tongue after Phlebotomy from the Cephalic Vein. But the benefit of phlebotomy from both veins which are under the tongue is that phlebotomy from the Cephalic vein is for premonitions which are in the throat, and pain of the uvula, and pains of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomy from these is that the sick person should sit between your hands in front of the sun; and elevate their tongue, and look beneath the tongue on one side for a vein, and on the other side for a vein; and the color of both inclined towards blackness.
Therefore phlebotomize both; and be careful not to place your hand at the end in phlebotomizing them. For under them are arteries, and perhaps there may occur a flow of blood from those arteries.
But the three veins which are phlebotomized in the elbow, are those of which phlebotomy runs customary in all men.
And phlebotomy from them is done according to two ways. Either by puncturing with a myrtle phlebotomizing instrument broad; or olive-wood sharpened to subtlety; or by cutting with a phlebotomy knife, which is Alnesil. And this is its form.
And from these are broad and slender kinds according to the width of the veins and their tightness. And it is suitable for opening concave veins, full, proceeding, apparent, large, and those which contain thick, turbid blood.
And this phlebotomist is of lesser width, and more delicate extremities.
And it is suitable for phlebotomy of subtle veins, which contain subtle yellow blood
But the vein of Albucasis, which is one of these three veins, is a benefit for phlebotomy. Because it draws blood from illnesses which are under the throat and neck, from that which follows the chest, and belly; and it is suitable for the phlebotomist to be cautious with this vein, and to be fearful of it, for under it is an artery. Therefore if he errs, and adds to the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will strike that artery, and there will be a flow of blood. Therefore it is necessary for the phlebotomist not to pierce it with the phlebotomy lancet; rather, let him cut with an Alnesil.
But if the Basilica does not appear with manifest appearance, then it is necessary for you to seek another vein and change to another, or to search for a branch of it; or let the phlebotomist in place of it use the Vein of the Arm. For it itself is manifest, and cut it with a phlebotomy lancet, as we said.
But if you wish for the phlebotomy of the same, then it is necessary before the constriction of the arm, to touch the place until you know the place of the pulse. Then mark on the place with a cautery, afterwards constrict the arm, and cut the vein with a concave incision with a phlebotomy lancet, as we said. And be careful that the percussion does not fall through the space from the place of the artery.
And when you see, as you tighten the ligature, swelling in the place which you marked with a cautery, then that swelling is swelling of an artery; therefore avoid it.
And if you see blood rise during phlebotomy, like a child's urine, and it is thin, reddish blood; then know that it is from arterial blood. Then hasten, and place your finger upon it for a long time, then remove your finger. And if the blood is cut off (for it often is), then bind the arm and let it go; and let the weak person be cautious of its movement; and let there be fear upon him.
And let him not move it for several days until it heals.
But if the blood is not cut off and overcomes you and there is no medicine present to you at that moment, then cut into the artery if it appears to you. For its extremities contract and the blood is cut off.
Or take pistachio bark and grind it; take one half and bind it over the place of a vein constriction with a ligature and poultices until another day.
Then if the blood is cut off, it is good. And if not, then treat it with that of which previous mention was made from the place of powders cutting off the flow of blood; and the cutting off of its blood is not difficult in many constitutions because of the small place of the wound and the possibility of a ligature from the arm.
The phlebotomy of the basilic vein is advantageous because it draws blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; therefore, because it is composed of a branch of the basilica and a branch of the cephalic, as we said.
And it befits the phlebotomist to fear from its phlebotomy, for under it is a nerve. Therefore, if he adds to the puncture in bloodletting and finds a nerve, there occurs numbness in it, and healing becomes difficult for it, and perhaps it does not heal completely.
And this nerve often appears to the senses. But if it is concealed in some people and is subtle and does not appear, then it is necessary that you place your bloodletting where the phlebotomist makes a section with Alnesil, and avoid the nerves with your strength.
But if a vein is between two nerves, then find the vein in length.
Concerning the Cephalic Vein. But bloodletting of the Cephalic vein is beneficial because it draws blood from the head and contributes to eye diseases.
And it is necessary in this vein especially, if you wish, that you puncture it with an olivewood phlebotome or a myrtlewood phlebotome because it is the safest of all veins, since there is neither an artery below nor a nerve.
However, it is fitting for you at bloodletting to avoid the head of a lizard only with the phlebotome and to seek a softer place: and it does not harm it if it is not found with the first percussion, so that you repeat upon it several times with the phlebotome.
However, perhaps it becomes inflamed in some people when not bloodlet in the first percussion, but that inflammation does not harm it at all.
Concerning the Benefit of Bloodletting and Precautions to be Observed in It. But the quality of bloodletting and its incidents from it, in whose correction you must think.
First of all, it is necessary for you to know that bloodletting is not administered except in the preservation of health and its continuance, and caution from the advent of diseases.
And for bloodletting to be done in one of three veins which are in the elbow, namely the Cephalic, and the Fusca, and the Basilica. And so that bloodletting be done at the beginning of spring on an empty stomach, in truth, and in summer; and autumn, and winter after eating, when the signs of repletion appear.
And let bloodletting be done on the first day, or the third, after three hours have passed from the day.
Bloodletting which is administered in illnesses does not have a determined hour; but when suitability and necessity provoke it, at night or day, and in every hour, and at every time.
And it is not necessary that children be bloodlet until they reach fourteen years upon them. Nor let a pregnant woman be bloodlet except from the fourth month up to the seventh. Nor let old men who have already passed sixty years be bloodlet.
Therefore when someone wishes to be bloodlet for whatever reason it may be: it is necessary that they cleanse their bowels before bloodletting with a gentle enema if there is much retained dung within them so that the veins do not draw up harmful putrid superfluities from the intestines at bloodletting.
Nor let a patient who has indigestion, that is, sickening fullness, be bloodlet; nor one who is drunk, nor recovering from drunkenness until that be removed from them. Nor an invalid with dropsy.
And beware of bloodletting again after a colic attack, and vomiting, and diarrhea, and multiplication of intercourse, and labor, and exercise, and wakefulness, and fasting, and anything which dissolves the power from the bodily or animal thing.
Then consider in subtlety of humors before that, if the blood is thick with foods and drinks, and medicines: if it is possible to do that.
Then let him enter a bath if nothing prohibits it; or exercise himself with some exertion so that the blood becomes thinner.
And perform bloodletting on his chest, around the third hour of the day, as we have said; and endeavor that his chest be evacuated that day from all animal evils: such as anguish, anger, and fear; and from all bodily accidents, such as labor, and pain, and excessive intercourse, and those similar.
And let the things with whose use mankind has become accustomed from fragrance and smell and joy and similar things be present to his seat as much as possible.
Then let the phlebotomist sit upon a cushion which is higher than the cushion of the patient; afterwards let him extract his arm and rub it with his hand twice or thrice. Then let him tie a ligature with a tourniquet and wind it twice.
And let the constriction be temperate, for when the constriction is unequal or excessive, it then obstructs the course of blood; and also in relaxation it obstructs the course of blood.
Then after the constriction it is necessary that the phlebotomist rub his hands together until the veins swell and declare themselves to the senses.
Then let the phlebotomist cleanse the place to be cut with a little old oil.
Then let him place the index finger of his left hand upon the very vein below the place where he intends to perform the phlebotomy, slightly so that the vein does not flee and percussion occurs. For some veins are like a fleeing cord at phlebotomy and some are full of wind; and when you place the lancet upon them they contract under the lancet and deceive the phlebotomist and do not open; and if it does open, it is constricted. Therefore it is necessary that the phlebotomist be firm and attentive in all these things.
Then let him lay down the lancet. Therefore, if a vein is opened from one side only, it is good. And if not, then repeat that on the other side a little below or above it quickly: if the place does not swell up.
But if it swells up, or becomes weak and stretched, then let him go for a day or two: and let him not tighten the ligature. For perhaps it will draw a hot swelling. And let him not enter a bath.
Then let him repeat the phlebotomy, if he wishes.
But if the opening is small, or the blood flows subtly, and you fear that the quantity of blood you desire will not come out: then repeat the phlebotomy in the same hole according to its straightness, and add a little more in the operation.
And do this quickly before the place swells up, for a swollen place is frequent among many people during a small operation.
Therefore if you see it already swollen, then do not repeat it on top at all, for it will excuse nothing to you. And put something of oil feces over it: because it relieves the course of blood. And it is better in this place than the oil itself, and than other oils.
And similarly administer oil feces in all your phlebotomies, in which the phlebotomist intends to stop the course of blood; and they do this with tyriaca alfarach, and sagzenea, when one of them is placed on top of the place.
For blood becomes thinner and resolved when it is thick.
But if it happens that there is a large swelling in the place of phlebotomy, for it often happens, especially to him who is not a phlebotomist except from that side, or the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and put a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly warmed, on top: and bind it for an hour: because it will dissolve.
And it is necessary that you do this after the blood has been let from the vein itself, with its complement, or from another vein.
But if anything of blackness or greenishness remains in the place after a few days, it does no harm; and if you wish, put on it something of aloe or myrrh dissolved: or something from the juice of mint, that is, calamint or something like it.
And very often indeed there occur abscesses and swellings at the phlebotomy in Basilicata.
Place then your hand upon it, and if you find softness under your pressure upon it, then that swelling is bad. Therefore be careful to put on it something of what we have said. For perhaps arterial blood will flow from it.
But make a plaster for it with that which has astringency, so that the place hardens. Then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
And it is necessary that you draw from every man blood according to the amount of his strength. And what appears from the color prevailing over the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it flow out until it reddens; and similarly if you see it thick, then let it flow out until it becomes thin; and similarly if it is sharp, then let it flow out until its sharpness is removed.
And it is necessary for him who is full, strong, and needs bloodletting once a year, that the phlebotomy of the vein be enlarged and the incision wide; and in him who is weak, let it be the opposite of that.
And it is necessary that you draw it in stages and that the opening be narrow; and better in phlebotomy of a vein, what is administered is a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is safe from the flowing of blood and from the cutting of a nerve; and it is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy by width and length.
And for whom fainting is customary during bloodletting, it is necessary that he be given food before bloodletting with a small amount of bread soaked in pomegranate juice: or secaniabin if it is heated; and you should take from him three or four times the amount of blood.
And if his complexion is cold, then he should take bread soaked in syrup of rue, or in syrup of honey spiced with aromatics, or in aromatic fragrant syrup before bloodletting.
But if fainting occurs during bloodletting and the cause of it is excessive blood loss, then he should drink broth water and subtle fragrant syrup; and use aromatics with algae, and line his chest with them; and use the other remedies we mentioned in the chapter on fainting from evacuation.
But he who wishes to spare his arm and let out his blood a second time: it is necessary for him whose bloodletting is due to excessive evacuation, and whose strength is weak, that he should gradually let out blood according to the amount of his strength on consecutive days.
But he who wishes to spare his arm and let out his blood a second time, and whose body is strong, then let him do it after seven or nine hours from his first bloodletting.
But he who wishes to draw blood from his body to the opposite side from which it inclines: it is necessary that it be done to him on the second or third day.
But in whose body there is already much hot blood, and it is sharpened, and causes a fever to occur: it is necessary that the blood should leave from him at once, and a large amount should be drawn from him; and the opening should be enlarged until fainting occurs: after you have observed all the conditions of bloodletting; and put your hand on his pulse at the course of the blood, so that death does not occur in place of fainting. It often happens that this occurs when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligence occurs.
And it is not necessary when you wish to release the arm and release blood a second time, when the opening of the vein is already closed and the flow of blood becomes difficult, to press down on it forcefully and quickly extend it. For that is very bad, rather let it alone until it is phlebotomized a second time.
Or remove with the sharpness of the phlebotomy that which is coagulated from the blood in the opening of the vein and place something of salt dissolved in water on top of it. And place something from tyriacal alfaroch or sagzenea on top of it and apply a soft compression to it until the blood comes out.
But if the vein is already inflamed, then let it be and do not bind it until the inflammation subsides.
But if necessity compels you to release blood a second time and there is no excuse then either phlebotomize above that place or in another arm in another vein.
The vein of the arm that the phlebotomist cuts in Fuscae and Basilicae when they are not found and are hidden because it is composed of them.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is such that the sick person should insert their hand into warm water until the arm reddens and the vein appears clearly.
Then it should be bound above it with a ligament with slight constriction in the middle. Then make the phlebotomy across it gradually, not laterally, nor according to its length; and let the opening be wide, and let your phlebotomy be so that you phlebotomize it on the juncture of the hand a little.
But if the flow of blood is prohibited then immerse your hand again in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your need.
But if you are in the summer days, then you excuse yourself from repeating the hand in warm water. And indeed most of all the course of blood is put in warm water in the time of winter.
And phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all veins because there is no pulsating vein beneath it nor nerve.
Phlebotomy however of the Saluatella vein of the right hand, brings relief to liver ailments.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is such that you bind the mahason hand with a ligament or your own hand after you have immersed it in warm water until the vein is inflamed and made very evident to the senses. Then phlebotomize it transversely. And if you should cut it totally it will not harm her in any way.
And preserve so that you do not touch your hand with phlebotomy. For beneath it are nerves of the fingers laid bare from flesh.
Then repeat the hand to warm water and let the blood run in it. For if you do not repeat it in warm water the blood clots in the orifice of the vein and is prohibited from its course.
When therefore you have drawn out the necessary quantity of blood then put oil and salt upon the vein so that it does not consolidate quickly.
And similarly it is fitting that you do with every strict branch.
The advantage however of its phlebotomy from the left hand is: because it brings relief to spleen ailments and similarly proceed in its phlebotomy as you did in the second equally.
The advantage however of phlebotomy of the Saphenae is for ailments which are in the lower part of the body such as ailments of the wombs and retention of menses and infirmities of kidneys and ulcers of the hips and thighs old and similar ailments from these.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is such that the sick person should immerse his foot in warm water and rub it until the veins protrude, and bind above the junction of the foot with a ligature. And indeed the location of the veins is near the heel, apparent towards the thumb, and from it many branches extend into the surface of the foot.
Therefore, the phlebotomy should be performed on a larger branch of it, or at the heel in its collection; for this is better and safer.
But if the phlebotomist performs it on the surface of the foot, then beware of the nerves which are beneath it on the surface of the foot.
And make your incision transverse, as if you wished to cut it, and let the phlebotomy be Nesil.
But if the flow of blood is prevented, then immerse his foot again in warm water and let the blood run into it until it is evacuated.
But if the phlebotomist misses the vein in the first try, then repeat the phlebotomy a little way higher up, for this place is safe and you need not fear any harm from it, when you are careful of the nerves, as we have said.
And similarly with the Saphena vein of the other foot equally.
But as we said, the location of the Sciatic veins is near the heel on the outer side.
And the benefit of this phlebotomy is for pain in the ankle, when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is such that the sick person should enter a bath and hurry; and bind his leg from the side of the ankle up to above the heel with four fingers, with a thin, long ligature; for it will not appear except because of this.
When it then appears, perform the phlebotomy in whatever way is possible for you, or transversely; and it is better, either to cut it with an incision or to divide it with a section. For its place is safer, and it itself is very hidden in many men.
For its place is safer, and it itself is very hidden in many men. But if you do not find it, and it does not appear to the senses at all: then let phlebotomy take some branch of it, and that is the one which appears on the back of the foot, and towards the auricular: and beware of the nerves, and let it run from the blood a quantity as much as you wish.
Then loosen the constriction, and put leather over the place of phlebotomy, and bind the place. For it heals quickly.
Concerning Cupping, and the quality of its use.
Cups are made from horns, and from bronze, and from glass.
And cupping indeed is done according to two methods. With scarification, and extraction of blood: and the other is cupping without scarification.
And this cupping which is without scarification, is according to two methods. For it is either with fire. Or it is without fire.
And the places of the body where cupping is administered with scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen. Of which one is cupping Alnocrati, and it is the last of the head: and Alkehel, and it is the middle of the neck: and cuppings Alhagdahim, and they are two laminae of the neck from both sides at the same time: and cuppings of the menti, and it is under the jawbone in the lower part of the mouth: and cuppings of the two spatulas: and cuppings Alachosos above the end of the coccyx: and cuppings of the two focilium, and they are the middle of the two forearms: and cuppings of the two crura: and cuppings of the two caulae.
And cupping indeed does not extract blood from you from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and therefore its virtue does not fall from them, as is the case with it from phlebotomy. Nor should a windy treatment be administered with or without fire in any diseases arising from repletion until the whole body is evacuated.
But if necessity compels to windy treatment from illness or on account of custom, we administer it at any hour in the beginning of the month, at its end and in its middle, and at whatever time it may be.
This is because there are men who when blood multiplies in them until they need its extraction by windy treatment, find heaviness and headache in their head.
And among them are those who find repletion and redness in their face, head and neck. And among them are those who find itching in their face and forehead, and darkness and dulness in their eyes.
And some of them scratch the place of their windy treatment. And some of them have increased laughter. And some find the taste of blood in their mouth, or their tongue swells and discharges blood. And some have increased sleep. And some see blood and redness in their dreams, the dead, wounds and things similar to those.
Therefore when we see anything of these things, and especially if it is in the middle third of the month, we then order the windy treatment to be done after two or three hours have passed from the day.
The benefit of a windy treatment on the nape is that it contributes to heaviness in the head and what flows to the eyes. But indeed it must be done after the evacuation of the whole body.
And this windy treatment is in place of cephalic bloodletting.
And it is not permitted for one with a cold complexion or who has catarrh to use it. For it brings great harm to him.
And for that reason, old men should not use them, and those in whose heads are cold illnesses.
But whoever is diligent over it, oblivion is generated upon him.
And for that reason it is necessary to command the one who uses the wind instrument to lay down his hand when the wind instrument is applied a short time to the lower parts, fearing from the generation of oblivion.
Cupping or cautery is in place of venesection of the Fusca and basilica vein, and for that reason it relieves asthma, constriction of breath, fissure of the instrument of breath, cough, and repletion.
And it is necessary that the cupping instrument or cautery be applied a short time, for if it is placed lower, it generates weakness in the heart and stomach.
Cupping with hagdahim relieves pains that occur in the head, ophthalmia, hemiplegia, perforation, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is in place of venesection of the basilica vein.
And it is necessary that you command the one who uses cupping not to press his hand with scarification so that he does not strike an artery and cause a flow of blood.
Cupping under the chin relieves drunkenness in the mouth and corruption of the gums, and similar ailments that are in the mouth; and it stands in place of venesection of the alierich veins, which are in the two lips.
Cupping with spatulas relieves alchafach, which comes from repletion and heat.
Cupping of the interior parts with two cups relieves the benefit of venesection of the three veins, Basilica, Fusca, and Cephalica; for it draws blood from all those small veins that are in the flesh; and those small veins draw from other thicker veins until the attraction reaches the three veins.
And it is necessary that you instruct the cupper not to proceed much in the scarification; because the place is laid bare of flesh, and under it are nerves and arteries.
But the cupping glass which is applied over the fleshy parts brings relief to hemorrhoids of the anus, and lower ulcers.
And it is necessary that you instruct the cupper that the cupping glass be large, and that it be of metal; because the place needs strong suction, and perhaps slender cupping glasses may break; and let it be scarified with a large scarification.
Cupping glasses diminish the legs with manifest reduction; because they draw blood from the whole body, and they bring relief to old pains in the kidneys, and wombs, and bladder; they provoke the menses, and they bring relief from cough and asthma; and they stand in place of two vein openings of the saphenous veins, and the alhorcobeni.
However they weaken the body greatly, and they cause fainting to occur in many people.
And the benefit of cupping the alhorcobeni is close to the benefit of cupping the two legs.
The quality of the position of cupping glasses is that you place the cupping glass first empty, and suck with temperate suction; and do not prolong the placement of the cupping glasses, but put them quickly, and remove them quickly, so that the humors may come to the place with equal arrival: and do not cease to repeat this and continue it until you see the place already reddened and swollen, and the redness of blood appears; then therefore scarify, and repeat the suction gradually. Then consider in the disposition of bodies.
For he who is of men of tender flesh, rare pores, it is necessary that you scarify him once, no more; so that the place may not be ulcerated.
And instruct the cupper that he enlarge the scarification, and make it shallow; and that he temper the suction in ease, and speed, and gentle motion.
If there is swelling in the blood, then it is necessary to scarify it twice. In the first incision, a way is opened for the thinning of the blood and its wateriness; and in the second, for a careful extraction of thick blood.
But if the blood is very feculent, then let a third incision be made so that the last stage is reached.
And finally, when we wish to extract blood gradually or a little, one incision is enough for us. But if we wish for a large extraction of blood, we make many incisions.
And if we determine that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to scarify with a deep incision; and the equal end in the incision is the depth of the skin.
What oil ought to be administered for ventosas and what precautions should the phlebotomist take?
Now, in the case of one whose skin is thick, hard, dark, and whose pores are tight, it is necessary that the places for ventosas be anointed with opening, softening, and resolving oils; if it is summertime, such as oil of alkari or violet oil, or oil from sweet almonds, or oil from pumpkin seed.
And if it is wintertime, then narcissus oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or syrup of sarsparilla; and those similar to them.
But if the superfluity is thick and cold, then let the oil be bitter almond, or balm of Gilead oil, or white oil, or anise oil; and those similar to them.
But if the phlebotomist is dealing with a person who has open pores and delicate flesh, then it is necessary that oil be prohibited, and those people ought to wash the ventosa sites after cupping with rose water, or cold water, or sun water, or pumpkin water, or purslane water; and similar ones to them.
He whose blood is of much humidity should wash with vinegar, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
But he who has thick humors should wash his wounds with old wine, or samsuck water, or anise decoction, or chamomile, and similar things.
And it is necessary that dressing be done in a bath, or in the trace of a bath, but rather it is necessary that it be administered after leaving the bath for an hour, or for two hours.
And it is not necessary for anyone to sleep after dressing.
What should be regulated by cupping or phlebotomy before dressing?
And afterwards it is necessary that you consider first: then if cupping or phlebotomy be choleric and conquer upon his blood sharpness and inflammation: then it is necessary that he receive refrigerants such as pomegranate rind, and also endive with vinegar and lettuce, and secaniabin, and iuleb, and similar things.
And make his foods chickens, and eggs boiled hard, and foods seasoned with sourness, and similar things.
And he whose constitution is cold should take in drink syrup of honey, or of almonds, or of alsecaniabin made from seeds: and let him take fragrant wine medium, which is between old and new: and it is ordered that he use a scarcity of food. And put its food, chicks and sparrows: and finches, that is, small birds: and dove chicks he should prepare.
And it is necessary that the drink on the day of cupping and bloodletting be more than food: and it is necessary that it be given in the drink in some men in the hours tyriaca alfaroch, or a medicine from musk, that is, musk, or alesselithe before cupping: and before bloodletting, or after: so that the principal members are strengthened, and the blood is thinned. And it is not necessary for them to take it in heated drink.
Concerning Cupping Without Scarification. But cuppings which are without scarification are those which are placed upon the liver, and spleen, and gouty toes, and upon the belly, navel, and places of the kidneys, and the anchae part: because these members do not endure scarification upon themselves.
And it is not sought by them, unless either attraction from the blood of a member to a member: such as we place the cupping upon the nipples in the illness of a flow of blood from the nose. And we use them so that we loosen cold invisible windiness from a member into a member: such as we place the cupping upon the belly and navel. For it itself rarefies the member and heats it, and removes pain therefore because it dissolves that windiness.
It is also placed upon the kidneys when obstruction or a stone occurs in them. For by its power of attraction it perhaps opens the obstruction, or eradicates the stone from its place.
And similarly it does when placed upon the liver and spleen for relieving windiness in both of them.
And these cuppings are administered empty with section only. And sometimes they are administered with fire.
And sometimes full of warm water are administered in pleural diseases: and that is, so that a cupping glass be filled, and be large, with hot water alone, or water in which herbs suitable have been boiled.
The form of a cupping glass administered with fire.
Let the width of its opening be two open fingers, according to what we have formed: and let its depth be half a palm: and let there be on its side in a place which is approximately its middle, a small hole, according to the amount that a needle itself enters into it; let it be made from brass together, or from citrine, with thick edges, smooth, equal, polished: so that it does not injure the limb upon its position above it: and let there be in its middle a crosswise rod from brass, or iron, where a candle with fire is placed.
And now this cupping glass is made large, greater than that which we have described, and a little less than that, according to the illnesses and the age of he who uses it.
For cupping glasses for children, and weaklings are different, than cupping glasses for men, and thick bodies.
The manner of placing this cupping glass with fire upon a limb, is that you kindle tow with fire from linen decently, or a small candle from wax: and place it upon the middle of the crosswise rod which is in the middle of the cupping glass: so that the fire be ignited approximately at the lower part of the cupping glass, so that the body of the sick person is not burned.
Then let it be placed upon the limb: and a finger should be upon the hole which I have said, until when we hold the cupping glass: whenever we need to, let us remove the finger, and let vapor go out over that hole, and the cupping glass will be released immediately.
Then kindle tow according to its manner, and repeat it if you need it.
But the cupping glass which is administered in pleural disease with water, does not have a crosswise rod, nor a hole: and it is not administered except because it is filled with water, and is placed upon the limb only.
And this is its form.
And the larger this cupping glass is, so that it may hold much water, the better it is.
On the Suspension of Bloodletting Instruments.
Bloodletting instruments are not administered on many [parts of the body], except in those members where it is not possible to place cupping glasses, because of their small size, such as the lip and gum and things like them. Or on a member stripped bare of flesh, such as a finger and nose and things like them.
And the quality of using them is that you should come from bloodletting instruments which are in sweet, clean waters free from putrefaction.
Then they should be let go in sweet water day and night until they are hungry, and nothing remains in their bellies. Then the body should first be evacuated with bloodletting and cupping. Then wash the sick person's limb until it reddens. Then place them upon it.
Therefore when they are filled and fall off and it is possible to suck the place with a cupping glass, then that is the best outcome for healing; and if not, then wash the place with vinegar. Then wash it thoroughly with much water and rub and squeeze it.
And if the flow of blood is prolonged after the leech falls off and it oozes, then infuse a linen cloth in cold water and place it on top until the oozing stops.
And if the blood multiplies then sprinkle powdered alum or gallnuts and things like them from astringents on top until the bleeding stops.
Or place bean poultices, peeled, on top and let them stay until the beans adhere to the place, for the blood will stop.
And it is necessary if a repetition of leeches is needed, whenever possible, to change them.
If bloodsuckers are prohibited from suspension, then let the place be washed with fresh blood. Or fix a needle in the places until something comes out of the blood. Then let them be placed, for they themselves when they sense something from the blood, adhere immediately.
Therefore when you wish them to fall off, sprinkle something ground from aloes, or salt, or ashes upon them, and they will immediately fall off.
This chapter is also very often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations of accidents in bones.
Know you sons that foolish physicians and the common people boast about this chapter who have never looked upon an ancient book nor read a letter from it.
And for this reason it happens that this method from the sciences is private in our land. And I have never encountered anything altogether good in it and have not obtained from it that which I have obtained except for the length of reading ancient books and study upon their understanding until I extracted the knowledge of it from them.
Then I adhered to experiment and the study for the length of my life.
And now I have described to you in this chapter all that contains my knowledge and upon which my experiment passed after I shortened it for you and freed it from the occupation of elongation and shortened it with the end of abbreviation and showed it with the end of declination and formed within it many forms of instruments that are administered in it, when it is by addition of declination, just as I did in the two preceding chapters.
Chapter II.
It is necessary, as we shall say in the prologue of this chapter, the main points and chapters, to which the craftsman is first urged to attain understanding of their truth: namely, so that you, and those who are ready, may know or learn this noble art, and others from you.
I say, therefore, that when it happens to someone a fracture, or dislocation, or torsion, or fall: then it is necessary that you hasten first to phlebotomize him, and to loosen him, or both together: if nothing prevents it, such as weakness of strength: or he is a child, or decrepit old man, to whom something like this has happened: or it is a time of intense heat, or intense cold.
Then let him be content with his food, cold vegetables, and poultry and goat meats: and forbid wine, and thick meats, and filling up from foods and all food that fills the veins with blood. Until when you are safe from a hot abscess, and do not fear the effusion of matter to the limb: then let the sick person return to his first usual regimen with which he ran.
When therefore a broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the sick person eats nourishing foods, much, thick, heavy, in which there is viscosity: such as food made from boiled wheat with water, and rice, and heads, and feet, and guts of cows, and eggs, and fresh fish: and thick wine, and things similar to them. For with this regimen coagulation of the fracture is faster and better.
And know that broken bones, when they are in the veins which are in the first old age and decrepit ones, it is not possible that they continue and consolidate according to their own nature always, because of the dryness of their limbs: and those which are from them in the end of tenderness continue and consolidate.
Indeed nature attaches something similar to glue to a fractured bone on every side, in which there is thickness, so that it adheres and constricts it until they are joined together and are bound together, until finally it comes to strength and firmness, as it was at first, until nothing prevents it from its functions: and for this reason it is necessary that you place nourishment for the weak food in which there are gravity, viscosity, and thickness, as we said.
And know that fractures are of various kinds, according to the diversity of limbs: since a fracture of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the breastbone is different from a fracture of the dorsal bone; and similarly all the other members are different from each other; and I have come with a recollection of every species of fracture exposed in its own Chapter distinguished from another. And the species of bone fractures are also diversified within themselves.
For it happens that its fracture is arched, besides which stars occur in it. And sometimes its fracture happens according to the length of the bone: and there are fractures of it that are splintered, that is, stars, and additions proceeding, such as are in a reed, when a knife is fitted for writing. And not proceeding: and there is a fracture with a wound and disruption in the head: and there is a small fissure fracture.
And to every species there is an ingenuity or proper instrument in its restoration, according to what will come to its recollection, distinguished in its places.
And from that by which a bone fracture is known, there is its crookedness and prominence: and the appearance of it to the sense and its sound when you press it with your hand.
Therefore when there is no apparent crookedness in the place, nor a sound at your touch when you touch the bone with agitation, nor does the weak one find great pain; then there is no fracture there, but it is possible that there is crookedness or a small fissure: therefore it is not necessary that you move it with your hand and compression altogether, rather place upon it from medicines of which its recollection comes after that moment which suits the place: then let a fine bandage be applied.
And know that when a place arches and is split in two, except for what may happen to it in terms of boils, nevertheless all parts are removed from their companions: then you must begin at your hour to straighten it out, equalizing it before a hot abscess occurs to it.
But if a hot abscess occurs to it, then let it be for several days until the abscess is quiet. Then equalize it according to whatever method is possible from gentleness and ingenuity.
And know that its restoration and equalization is easier than bone, in which boils occur.
Then constrict it according to how the memory of it will come to you.
But if there are boils in the bone, then extension of this broken limb is necessary from two parts, if it is a hand or foot: or with your hand, if the limb is small; or with two cords, or with a cord and a hand.
And let your position be such that you place the limb upon an equal place, according to its natural shape, until when the parts of the broken limb are extended: then try to make those additions return with all your ingenuity and according to whatever method you can in their places; and be careful according to your strength, lest pain or injury should occur to the weak one through your operation: and try according to your strength to apply one of the two bones with its companion, according to the better forms.
And it is necessary at that hour for you to try and touch it with your hand. If therefore you see something different there, straighten it out and equalize it according to the amount of your strength.
And be careful of vehement extension and strong compression, as many stupid people do. Very often they cause a hot abscess or contraction to occur in the limb through their operation as we have already seen many times from their operations.
Then apply after equalization and decent operation and constriction of that member and quiet and tranquility and admonish the sick person about it. And make him beware lest he move it in the hour of his vigils and sleep at its turning and stirring and at evacuation and all its motions with the last strength. And let him beware that the position of the member not be in a position with which pain follows. For this is because when he feels pain or injury in the arrangement of the position of the member then it is necessary that he change it to another arrangement from which he does not feel pain.
And beware with him that his position be equal and straight so that crookedness may not occur in the member when it is restored.
And the quality of the constriction of the fractured member is according to what I relate.
Know that fractured members are differentiated in their smallness and their magnitude and their form.
Therefore those which are small from them, such as the arm and finger and calf and those similar to them, then it is necessary that there be a wrapping of soft subtle cloth. But those which are large from them such as the hip and leg it is necessary that there be a wide, hard wrapping in them.
Because a broad bandage connects a large member and constricts it from every part with equal constriction so that a stain does not enter into it.
Then begin after your evacuation from equalization to place a suitable unguent on it in a soft pledget over the place of its fracture. Then begin to wrap the bandage over the place of its fracture with three or four wrappings according to what the member deserves and constrict your hand a little with the bandage.
Then go up with it to the part above the place of the fracture and constrict less than the constriction with which you constricted the fractured place. Then elongate it with inversion from the place of the fracture a little, and soften the stricture gradually, until you take a large thing from a healthy place.
Then take another ligature and apply it again over the fractured place with inversions. Then go with inversion to the lower part from the fracture. And let your operation be in the stricture of inversion, and its softening, according to what we said in the first upper inversion.
Then place between the inversions from soft lint, or cloth, with which the crookedness of the fracture may be equalized, if there is crookedness in it; and if not, do not put anything in it.
Then apply another ligature over it. Then equal stars moderately made immediately over these inversions, if there is no swelling in the place nor a hot abscess.
But if there is swelling or an abscess in it: then place over it what settles that abscess and removes the swelling; and leave it for several days. Then bind stars over it then.
And let the stars be from halves of wide cane, planed, wisely formed; or they are from wood from which strainers are made, which are made from pine or terebinth, that is, palm branches, or calamus; and let the width of the whole star be according to this shape, and the same figure.
However, it is necessary that the star which is placed over the very traction be a little thicker and wider than the remaining stars; and the length of the star be according to what is allowed for the member by size and smallness.
Then bind over the stars with another ligature, according to the same first stricture. Then bind over it with threads moderately, according to what we said about the stricture; and it is that your stricture be greater over the place of the fracture; and the farther it is elongated from the fracture, let the stricture be smaller.
And it is necessary that threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and be made from soft linen.
For if the threads are thick, as I have seen from the operation of stupid people putting their threads from twisted flax cords, it is a great error: because constriction falls with them outside of quality.
And thin threads again are not suitable: for you do not achieve through constriction with them that which you desire.
And it is not necessary that there be less than a finger between star and star.
And if the weak one is injured through the extremities of the stars after constriction in healthy places: then place under them from soft tow, or carded wool, until nothing is injured from it.
But when there is a fracture with a wound, and disruption occurs in the skin, I will come with a recollection of it in the second chapter singularity.
And know that not every fractured limb ought to be constricted with stars from the first day. For it is because when a limb is large, it is not necessary for you to place stars upon it except after five days, or seven, or more, according to your safety from the event of a hot abscess.
And this is the method of plasters, with which the ancients used to restore, which are placed upon fracture and dislocation.
A Method of a common abbreviated plaster, restoring fracture, suitable for many complexions, especially for women and boys: because it is from it above which neither heat nor cold overcomes.
And it is that you should take from the powder of a mill, and it is the marrow of flour which hangs in the walls of the mill at the movement of the millstone: and make it as it is, except that you sift it with bran: and put its confection neither thick nor thin. Then use it.
Another Method for a Plaster, Restoring a Fracture, and Dislocation, and Torsion. Take almonds, and laudanum, and acacia, and enula, and mugwort: and the juice of all, each ten drachms; myrrh, and aloes of both kinds, each five drachms; and alethil twenty drachms; let all be ground, and sifted, and mixed with alethil water: or with the white of an egg, if the complexion of the sick person is heated. Then use this plaster. For it is of good composition, restores broken bones quickly, and brings benefit to many people.
Another Method for a Plaster, which also Brings Benefit to Fractures and Torsion. Take mugwort, and mess, and white alteae, all ten drachms each; myrrh, and aloes of both kinds, each five drachms; acacia six drachms; Armenian bole twenty drachms; let all be ground with much grinding, and sifted, and made into a plaster with water, or the white of an egg: and apply.
Another Method for a Plaster for Joints, and Bones Separated from Their Places: and It Quiets the Pain Happening to Them, and a Crack in the Bone, and a Fracture. Take boiled wool, and submerge it in vinegar, and boiled oil; and place it upon the area.
And truly this plaster has no power of restoration, but it is good for quieting a hot abscess: and properly expels pains.
Another Method for a Plaster, Which Restores a Broken Bone. Take leaves of the deaf fig, and leaves of wild poppy; and grind all, and make a plaster from both.
Another Method for a Shortened Plaster, Applied in the Restoration of a Fracture of a Bone: and When You Wish the Resolution of a Remaining Abscess. Take root of altaea, and chamomile, and flowers of violets, and herb flour, all one part each; grind all, and make them into a plaster with wine, if the limb is not heated.
If it is heated, then prepare it with coriander water or with water and use it.
Method of another stronger plaster for dissolving, than this first, when a hard abscess occurs during the restoration of a limb. Take of the root of altaea, and flaxseed, and balaustium, and melilot, and samsuck, and the flower of violets, and chamomile, all an equal part, grind them all together, and prepare them with willow water, or with sweet water, or with wine. The whole of it according to the heat of the limb, and the rest of its heat.
However Hippocrates did not say in his book that a plaster should be placed on a fractured limb during its restoration unless it was made from wax and oil: nothing else; and he narrated that it should be a medium between thickness and subtlety.
But Galen thought that things should be placed on a fractured limb during its restoration in which there is a drying of heat, such as myrrh and aloe and frankincense, and similar ones to them from those which we have narrated.
Method of a Plaster Which Brings Together Injury and Pain. Take of mugwort and chickpea and human hair cut off, or bird feathers, and altaea and salt equal parts; grind them and sift them and prepare them; and make a plaster from it.
But the quantity according to which it is necessary for the ligature to remain, then be dissolved, is that you consider then if neither faint pain nor itching occurs, nor does the fractured bone move from its place; then do not dissolve it in many days. But if violent itching occurs to it in the place, or restless pain, or swelling; then hurry and dissolve it in an hour, and remove the plaster from it; and take a soft cloth, or a soft damp sea sponge: and immerse it in lukewarm water, and wash the place with it until the itching subsides and the pain settles.
But if violent itching occurs to it in the place, or restless pain, or swelling; then hurry and dissolve it in an hour, and remove the plaster from it; and take a soft cloth, or a soft damp sea sponge: and immerse it in lukewarm water, and wash the place with it until the itching subsides and the pain settles. Then let the limb rest for an hour. Then place upon it wool soaked in vinegar and oil, or rose oil; and bind it on for a night until you are secure from hot abscess and the swelling of the limb subsides, and its pain is removed.
Then apply it to a delicate strapping and a small plaster; and do not constrict it with your first binding, but delicately with it until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess, redness, pain, swelling, and all accidents are now entirely removed, and it no longer needs plaster and strapping, then apply it just as you did at first equally.
But if none of those things which we have said happen to the limb, then do not unbind it except after three, four, five, or seven days. And when it is released entirely after twenty days according to what appears to you from the unbinding of the limb as we have said, until when the fracture adheres and coagulation of flesh approaches it: add then even in binding more than your whole first binding; and add also in the increase of food for the weak, according to its preceding recollection.
But if you see the place of the fracture already drying out and weakening more than it ought to: then know that nourishment is prevented from reaching it. Therefore embrocate it with warm water at every time you unbind it, and let it be so for three days; and ease the binding a little.
By this operation, nourishment flows to the limb and heals quickly.
What foolish restorers do from a fracture of the limb with other juices when it is not restored at first according to what is necessary and restored according to crookedness is an error from their operation and great fear; and if it were right, the ancients would have said so in their books and operated accordingly.
And I have not seen any trace of them there at all, and it is better that it not be done.
On the making of an accidental wound on the head.
There are several types of fractures and many shapes of them, and their causes are distinct.
For there is a fracture that occurs from a blow with a sword and the blow removes the whole bone until it reaches the dura mater, which is beneath the bone, just as an axe does to wood; and because of this, this type of fracture is called Axial.
Or a sword strikes a certain part of the bone and strikes its surface and the incision does not penetrate to its end; and this type of fracture is called Kalaan, that is, Elevation.
And a wound may be of two fractures, either large or small.
And there is a fracture which is comminution or attrition; and its cause is a blow with a stone, or a fall onto a stone, or things similar to them.
And this fracture is also either penetrating, which already approaches the periosteum, which is beneath the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone: and a wound from these two fractures is also either small or large.
And there is a fracture which is hidden in the bone to the subtlety of a hair; and it is a small fissure and because of this, this type of fracture is called Capillary.
And from these is a fracture that occurs from a fall or a blow from a stone and things similar to them which cause a plate of bone to enter inwards and a cavity is formed; just as it happens to caldrons of air when they are struck by a blow and a part of them enters inwards.
And this indeed most often occurs in the heads of soft bones, such as the heads of children.
And all these types of fracture are made distinct and separate, and I will come with the remembrance of it all in its place.
And we recognize all these kinds of fractures through examination upon them, and inquiry into them with probes, and removal of corrupted flesh which is upon them.
A capillary fracture, however, is recognized by this, that it is detected upon the bone, and is removed and smoothed over with a cautery: for the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of a fracture, consider first the accidents of the sick person: then if you see from the accidents that it signifies with manifest indication fear, such as vomiting, cholera, extension and loss of intellect, and cessation of voice, and syncope, and acute fever, and protrusion of the eyes, and redness of them, and things similar to these in many constitutions, without a doubt it will not be healed: and if you see accidents that are not terrifying to you, and you hope for safety: then begin its treatment.
Which is this, if a wounded person comes to you first when he is wounded: and it is this in the winter months, then it is necessary that you endeavor in the removal of the bone before the fourteenth day according to every constitution.
And if it is in the summer months, then it is necessary that you hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, before what is beneath the bone from the subcutaneous tissue becomes corrupted, and those accidents occur which we have described.
And if the fracture of a bone has already reached the subcutaneous tissue touching the brain, and it is with small fragments and traction: then it is necessary that you cut into the crushed and abraded part, according to what I tell you.
And it is necessary that you shave the head of the wounded person: and expose the bone according to any method possible for you: and according to the shape of the wound, and what is light upon the sick person.
And if it should happen to you upon the exposure of the bone a flow of blood, or a hot abscess: then oppose it with what is necessary. And it is, that you fill the place with cloths soaked in wine and rose oil; and make the wound rest, until the pus subsides, and you are safe from the flow of blood. Then begin in the cure of the bone, and its removal.
And that is done according to one of two methods.
One method indeed is, that you cut the bone with a sharp-pointed chisel; and this is its form.
Then apply another chisel after the first chisel somewhat wider; and this is its form.
Then apply yet another chisel wider even than the second.
And the second method is, that you have a number of diverse chisels; some of which are wider than others, and some of them shorter than others; and they are at last sharp at their extremities, and are made of steel or iron; and use ease in striking upon the chisel so as not to jolt the head and injure it.
But if the bone is strong and hard, then it is necessary that you pierce around its circumference before you apply chisels, with awls which are called non-penetrating awls; and they are not called thus except because they do not pass through the termination of the bone into the flesh beyond it; therefore, because the awl has a round end above what is beneath its sharp point, similar to a margin, and a small circle prevents submerging and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is fitting for you to take a large number of these awls, each of which suits the quantity of thickness of the bone, until you have present for every skull an awl; whose sharp end's quantity in length and shortness be according to the quantity of thickness of that skull.
And this is the form of three species of awls, or trepans.
The quality of piercing around a fractured bone is: that you place the awl upon the bone and revolve it with your fingers until you know the bone has already been penetrated. Then the saw should be moved to another place and put what is between all the holes the size of the radius or about that.
Then cut with the incisors what is between all the holes from the bone and make it thinner than you can on that from the end of lightness as we said until you eradicate the bone either with your hand or with some other instruments which you have prepared for it such as pincers and fine forceps.
And it is necessary that you are careful with all caution lest the saw or the incisors touch anything from the dura mater.
When therefore you have gone around the bone perforating and it has been separated from the dura mater if it was continuous with it and you have extracted it it is necessary that you scrape and make equal the extremity of it which remains in the bone with another instrument similar to the incisors. However it is necessary that it be thinner and more subtle than the other incisors.
And if anything remains from small bones and splinters then take those with ease with what you have from your instruments. Then care for the wound after that with linens and ointments which we said.
And another method of the operation is easy altogether far from fear which Galen said and praised it with great praise and this is his word. It is necessary for you first to begin to uncover the part of the bone from the place in which the fracture is more violent and more manifest until when you have uncovered that part and placed under it the extremity of this lentil-shaped incisor which has this shape.
And the lentil-shaped part gentle does not cut anything and the sharp part of it on its two sides extending in length as you see so that the lentil-shaped part is fixed to the dura mater with its face incident acute in the bone.
Then strike upon the incisor from one part with a small mallet until you cut through the whole bone with ease as it revolves and you are safe from the fatty tissue that no accident may happen to it which you fear altogether.
And if the surgeon were not more foolish than men and ignorant of it, nor asleep, then if anything remained attached to the bone from the fatty tissue in certain places, he would cut it away with the extremity of the lenticular knife, and free it easily. For it is freed from it without harm and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate as far as the fatty tissue, and that which is cut from the bone is its surface, and roughness and subtle spines remain in it; then it is necessary that you shave off that roughness, and root out those spines with subtle razors from which you have prepared a number of various sizes, so that it will be possible for you to administer from them in every place the more suitable ones, and the straighter ones, according to that to which the operation leads you, and the fractured bone itself, and its shape. And it is necessary that you administer in your reason, by which you first shave the bone, the wider of those razors. Then use a more subtle one after it.
And it is necessary that you administer in your reason, by which you first shave the bone, the wider of those razors. Then use a more subtle one after it. And do not cease doing that according to continuity, until you arrive at administering the thinnest and most subtle of them all.
But in every one of the remaining small capillary fissures and subtle fractures, it is necessary that you administer care according to that which leads to its correction.
And it is a thing which is not hidden from anyone who has any study at all in this art, and has stood upon that which we have written and shown in large fractures.
But if the fatty tissue which is uncovered is retained when you root out the bone, then it is necessary that you take a linen cloth according to the size of the wound and submerge it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound. Then take another cloth doubled or tripled and submerge it in wine and rose oil and place it over the first cloth; and do that as easily as you can over it so that it does not weigh down the wound.
Then apply a wide bandage over it; and do not bind it tightly except by the amount that will hold the wound only; and leave it thus with this care for one day or two days until you are secure from hot abscess. Then unbind it and apply afterwards medicines with which there is superfluous dryness: such as lily roots, and herb flour, and frankincense powder, and aristolochia, and the like; and let it be that you make a powder from these medicines, which shall be powdered over the wound as they are dry.
And generally apply to it every medicine of the quality which is to cleanse and not bite. And be careful according to your ability that the wound be clean in your care; and let there not be filth of ointment nor dirtiness in it.
And be careful according to your ability that the wound be clean in your care; and let there not be filth of ointment nor dirtiness in it. And do not allow the pus to collect in it at all; for when pus collects upon the membrane of the brain, it corrupts it and putrefies it, and a great harm befalls the sick afterwards; and now it happens in the skull, when it is cleansed from it, especially when its care is neglected, blackness appears on its surface.
Therefore consider then, if these accidents which we have mentioned happen to the sick man, know that it is undoubtedly pernicious.
And if the blackness does not happen except from the medicine which is put upon it, and it is in the power of that medicine to make that blackness; then it is necessary that you take one part from honey, three parts from rose oil, and saturate cloths with them. Then put it upon the skull; afterwards take care of it with suitable kinds of treatment until it is healed.
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken except its two upper parts together, or one of them; for it has two bones, because the lower part is cartilaginous and is not broken, and nothing happens to it except attrition, twisting, and the like.
If one of its two parts is broken, then you must insert your little finger into the nostril and equalize that fracture with your index finger, and push it outward with your thumb, until the nose returns to its natural shape; and this should be done skillfully and easily. And take care that during your operation that pain does not fall upon the weak one.
But if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and your finger does not reach it, then it is necessary that you equalize it with the extremity of a radius, in which there is a small thickness.
But if the fracture is in two parts, then do as described for one: and hasten with its restoration on the first day of the fracture, if it is possible. And if not, then after the seventh or tenth day at rest apply a warm poultice.
Then insert into the extremity of the nose a linen wick if the fracture is in one part; or insert two wicks if the fracture is in two parts; and let the thickness in the wick be of such quantity that it fills the nostril.
And some ancient restorers have said to infuse the wicks in butter and change them every day. However, that does not seem right to me; rather, it is necessary that the wick be infused in albumen or egg white mixed with a powder of millstone grit. Then leave the wick until the mouth becomes firm and the cartilage hardens.
And sometimes a goose feather is introduced into the nose in place of the wick after it is covered with a soft cloth; and it happens that it holds the fracture of the nose more strongly and so that the weak person is not prevented from breathing.
And this thing is not necessary. If you wish, do that; and if you wish, do wicks.
But if it should happen that the nose breaks again while you are working, apply a poultice to the nose with carrot, or with quince infused in rose oil, or a small amount of diascordium.
But if a hot abscess does not occur, then it is necessary that poultices be made with sesame flour and frankincense powder mixed with egg white. Then place a soft pledget on top of it, and do not bind the nose at all.
But if the bones are broken into a small fracture or are crushed, then it is necessary to make an incision above them and extract them with instruments that are suitable for them. Then suture the incision and treat it with what heals and strengthens it with suitable poultices or ointments.
But if a wound should occur between the nostrils, then it is necessary that you treat it with lint and insert a lead tube until it heals.
On the restoration of the lower jaw when it is fractured.
When the lower jaw is fractured and the fracture is not with a wound, then observe if its fracture is only external and it is not broken into two and curved inwards; then recognition of it is easy.
Therefore, it is necessary that if its fracture is on the right side, you insert the index finger of your left hand into the mouth of the sick person; similarly, if the fracture is in the left jaw, then insert the index finger of your right hand; and push the gibbosity of the fracture inwards with ease to the outside with your other hand from the inner part of the bone, and equalize it with it.
But if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two, then it is necessary that you apply extension from both sides, according to straightness; until its equalization is possible.
But if there already occurs concussion or disruption in the teeth, then bind those of which you hope that they will remain with gold wire, silver, or silk thread. Then place a cerecloth over the fractured jaw. Then place upon it a doubled cloth, and upon the cloth a large star carefully made; or a piece of skin equal to a sole, in length to the mandible.
Then bind it from above, according to how its ligature is prepared for you, and it suits its application, until it is not destroyed; and instruct the infirm person to be in tranquility and quietude; and have their food given them as gentle drinks.
But if you judge that something is already changing in some way: then hurry and untie it on the third day. Then correct what has been altered from it, and plaster it with powder of millennian, with albumen or with sesame flour, after you have removed the crust; and put soft wool on top of the plaster.
Therefore while that plaster remains attached to it, and the bone's position is not altered, leave it alone, do not untie it, until it is healed; or bind the fracture. Very often this fracture is bound for three weeks.
If it should happen that a hot abscess occurs in the meantime, then administer what we have said many times for its relief, until that abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is with a wound, consider. For if a piece has already separated from the bone, or from the periosteum: then carefully perform this so that you remove those fragments of periosteum with what suits you for their removal from instruments.
But if the wound's opening is narrow, then enlarge it with a phlebotomy according to the amount of your need.
Then when you have removed those fragments of periosteum, and nothing remains from them, sew the wound opening if it is wide; and if not, place one of the suitable plasters upon it so that it heals until it is cured.
On setting a fractured clavicle.
The clavicle is most often broken from the anterior part near the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Either it is broken and separated into two pieces, with or without splintering; this type is easier to set.
Or, splintering occurs within the bone; this type is more difficult to set.
Or, there is a fracture with a wound.
When the fracture is without a wound, the operation is performed as follows: have two assistants present, one to hold the fractured clavicle in place and the other to extend the neck towards the affected side.
Then, straighten the fracture with your fingers until it resumes its proper shape; there should be neither protrusion nor indentation.
If further extension is needed, place a sphere of cloth or wool under the patient's shoulder blade; its size should be appropriate to the situation. Extend and elevate the clavicle and compress the sphere with your hand until the fracture is aligned correctly.
If you cannot draw the end of the clavicle outward because it has sunk deeply, have the patient lie on their back and place a medium-sized pillow under their shoulder; have an assistant press down on their shoulder until the sunken portion of the clavicle is raised upward. Then straighten the fracture and align it with your fingers.
If you feel splinters from the clavicle moving, cut them open and carefully remove the splinters.
If the splinter is embedded in the bone, make an incision with a prepared chisel, after you have placed an instrument under the clavicle to hold it steady; this instrument can be made of wood or metal. And this is its form.
It resembles a spoon which has no concavity.
And let its width be according to that by which it does not fit into the bone from the size of it and its equality. Its length, however, also according to what is possible for you for the operation.
And let it have two ends, as you see: and one end be wide, and the other narrow.
But if the disruption of the wound which you have opened when you extracted the shattered bone is wide, and you are secure from hot inflammation: then join two lips of the wound with suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear hot inflammation: then fill the wound with cloths and lint according to the amount of the fissure of the wound.
And if it should happen that hot inflammation occurs, then infuse a cloth in rose oil, and vinegar, and wine, and place it upon it.
But when the stricture of the bone is without wound, and without incision, it is, that you place upon it a plaster made from mill flour with egg white. And place a soft wad upon it. Then place a sphere under its nipple, if you need it. Then take a himematem, that is, a wheel which the Saracens hold, which is very long: and let its width be one palm, or thereabouts. Then place doubled lint upon the wad and plaster. Then take a splint from a thin board, whose width is three fingers, and similarly in length. Then wrap it in cloth. Then wrap that cloth with the splint in the place of the himematem which falls upon the fracture and the place. Then place the himematem upon the fracture as it revolves, and wrap it upon its neck, and under its sound nipple, and under its unsound nipple: and reduce it over every part, and in the way that you see that the stricture holds the fracture with decent stricture: and this is that which is not concealed above you, and all of it, so that the splint is not removed from above the fractured bone. And for this reason it is necessary that you look at the sick man every day. Therefore, whenever the ligament is softened and you see that the star is already being removed, then straighten it and tighten the ligature.
Then place the sick man's sleep upon his back and put under his buttock at his place of sleep a little cushion at night so that it may rise with him as an aid from his side. The fracture of the clavicle is therefore raised by elevation of the shoulder.
Or bind his arm to his neck; and do not unbind the ligature unless it should happen in a place affected by itching, or from an abscess, up to twelve days.
Then renew the plaster if you see his face toward it. And add to the constriction and dismiss him until he is restored and coagulated.
And a fracture of the clavicle indeed is bound and strengthened according to most within twenty-eight days, and sometimes it happens within a lesser time in some men.
On the restoration of a fracture of the scapula.
The scapula is rarely fractured and in its broad part; and its margins are not broken from it unless.
When therefore a place is broken from it and broken in its middle and it is not recognized except by touch; then according to what the fracture's shape is, try its preparation. And reduce it upon the natural form in every way possible for your ingenuity.
Then place over the area powdered starch with egg white, and a soft pledget, and put over it a cushion from doubled cloth. Then place over it a wide star from a thin board according to the quantity of the whole scapula, or a little wider.
But if there is indeed a concavity under the star in any place of the scapula, then equalize that concavity with a soft pledget until the star descends according to evenness.
Then bind over it with a long strip of linen, with decent constriction and the firmness of a star, until it does not move from its place.
And consider the ligature every day. Therefore whenever the ligature becomes softened, bind it again and equalize the star if it moves from its place; and let the sick man lie on his sound side.
And the spatula indeed is restored in twenty days, or in twenty-five days.
When therefore this number is completed, then untie the ligature; and you will be in safety. For it is from bones whose union is not feared, nor their loosening.
But if a piece proceeds from the bone and pricks under the skin: then split above it and remove it. And do what we said in the fracture of the clavicle from the calming of a hot abscess, if anything happens from it.
On the restoration of a fracture of the breastbone.
The chest is sometimes broken in its middle, and that rarely happens. Its extremities indeed are most often broken and crushed from its accidents.
When its middle is broken, which inclines towards the lower parts, and it happens to him a violent pain, and difficulty in breathing, and coughing: and perhaps he vomits blood, and a concavity is shown in the fractured bone, and is not concealed from the sense, Its restoration is, that the sick man be laid on his back; and put between his spatulas poultice.
Then press his shoulders and join the ribs from both sides or flanks with your hands; and with subtlety in its equalization, according to every way as possible and it suits, until the shape of the bone returns, according to what is necessary.
Then put plaster and a wad on top of it, and place above it a star from a thin board of willow, or hazel, and those similar in lightness, after you have wrapped it in cloth. Then carefully bind it over the fractured bone so that it does not move; and go around with the bandage according to its roundness on the back several times, and tighten it with a decent constriction.
Then consider the bandage every hour, and whenever it becomes loose, tighten it; and if its need provokes its loosening at itching, or corrosion that occurs in the place, or pain, or an abscess: then hurry, and undo it, and remove the plaster, and correct what happened with the method of its treatment.
Then apply a plaster, if you see it fitting for that: and bind it with a constriction until it is healed.
On the restoration of ribs, when they are broken.
Know that the fracture of ribs does not occur except in thick places which follow the back, and from their extremities on the front side. And attrition does not happen to them unless because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the sense in inquiry with fingers.
And its restoration is done thus, that you equalize the fracture with your fingers according to the possible way, until the shape is equalized, according to what is fitting. Then apply plasters and bind the fractured bone with splints if it needs that.
And if the fracture of the ribs is sloping inwards: then there occurs a violent pain and stabbing, like that stabbing which occurs to one who has pleurisy; because the bone stabs the membrane, and also difficulty in breathing occurs to him, and coughing, and vomiting of much blood; and this is difficult to cure.
And the ancients have already been ingenious in it with many ingenuities: and among them are those who say that you should give the sick person foods which generate inflammation and windiness so that the belly becomes inflamed and extends and pushes the fracture outwards.
We, however, shrink from making a hot abscess quickly, unless it should happen. But if it already happens, then it adds to it.
And some of them said: let it be placed over the windy place, then let it be sucked with strength, and it is similar reasoning. However, it is feared that the windy one attracts superfluities to the place, because of a weakened disposition.
And some of them said: it is necessary that the place be covered with wool which has already been soaked in warm oil; and let poultices be placed between the ribs until it is filled, so that there be an equal ligature when you encircle it according to its roundness.
Then let the weak one be treated for pleurisy with food and medicine.
But if a violent thing constricts the weak one, which it does not tolerate, and pierces the veil with a stinging puncture, and we fear for the weak one; then it is necessary that we should cleave above the place and expose it from the broken rib. Then let us place upon it an instrument that preserves the suture, of which remembrance preceded: and let us pierce the mouth with ease, and pierce it itself.
Then let us join the two lips of the wound, if it is large with a suture; and let us treat it with plasters until it heals.
But if a hot abscess should happen meanwhile, then hasten and infuse poultices in rose oil, and put them upon the place; and let the weak one be treated with what suits the abscess.
Meanwhile, also let it be propped up on the side on which it sleeps until it heals.
Concerning the restoration of a fractured vertebra of the back and neck.
Fracture indeed sometimes befalls the bones of the neck, and attrition rarely happens to them; and similarly to the vertebrae of the back also. Therefore, when this happens to someone, and you wish to know whether it will heal or not: then consider. For if you see his hands already softened, and benumbed, and dead; and he cannot move them, nor extend them, nor constrict them; and when you constrict them with your fingers, and prick them with a sharp point, he does not feel it, and does not feel pain in them: then know that it will not heal, and is mortal in most cases.
But if he moves them, and feels constriction in them with fingers and pricking: then know that the nape of the bone is safe, and that the weak person will be healed with treatment.
But if it happens to the vertebrae of the back similar to that, and you wish to know whether it will heal or not: then consider his feet: then if you see that they are softened, and what happens in them happens in the hands: then when he lies on his back, wind passes and defecation occurs without volition: and when he is turned onto his stomach, defecation occurs without volition: and when he is turned onto his back again, and wishes to urinate, but cannot: then know that it is mortal. Therefore, do not labor in its treatment.
But if none of that happens to him, the matter is lighter.
And the treatment of what happens to him is that you try a poultice of hot fomentation: so that you put oil of roses alone on the affected vertebra: or with boiled eggs.
Put that on it several times a day until the hot swelling subsides: then put one of the strengthening and drying plasters on the place, and bind it with a bandage: and advise the sick person to use quiet and tranquility. And let him not sleep on the side where he finds pain until he is healed.
If it happens at the abrasion of a fractured bone, or something that is already separated from it: then it is necessary, so that you make an incision above the skin, and remove that. Then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with suture. Then care for it with some flesh-producing substance, from ointments, until it heals.
But if the last bone of the haunch is broken, and it is the end of the tail: then it is necessary, so that you insert the thumb of the left hand into the anus, and equalize the broken bone with the other hand, as much as possible, and in a second equalization.
Then place something over it, and remove it: and care for the wound with the healing that preceded, until it heals.
On the restoration of the anus.
Chapter XI.
Rarely are the bones of the anus broken. But if they are broken, then the fracture of them is not, except a comminution at their extremities: and they split lengthwise, and incline towards the interior: and there occurs a feeble pain in the place, and pricking: and the leg that is broken becomes numb.
And its restoration indeed is, so that you extend your hand over it, until you stand above the fracture in the manner of its shape.
But if the fracture is only at its extremities, then equalize that fracture according to what is prepared for you from equalization, until it resembles its natural shape.
But if the fracture is lengthwise, or has already inclined inwards: then make the weakling lie on its stomach, until preparation for the restoration of that fracture is made for you. When therefore you have equalized it, place a plaster over it: then place an splint made from wood, or from hide, over it: and bind a bandage over which you do not fear the displacement of the fracture, nor the removal of the splint.
And he should make the hollows equal to that which will fill them, until it is grasped by a constriction according to equality; and he should order the sick person to sleep on his back, or on his sound side.
But if a hot abscess should happen to it: then cease from its extension and its restoration, until the hot abscess subsides; and place upon it what subsided, according to what preceded, then return to its restoration; and constrict it as is necessary.
But if a fracture or a shattering occurs in the bone, extract it.
On the restoration of a fracture of the Collarbone.
The Collarbone is that which is between the Elbow and the Head of the Shoulder Blade.
Therefore if it is broken, its restoration is according to one of two ways.
One of which is: that you should take a flat piece of wood of medium thickness, according to this form which follows.
And two bandages should be tied at its two ends.
Then it should be suspended from an elevated place, and the sick person should sit on a seat. Then he should project his broken arm onto the wood, until it reaches its nipple, at which point the middle of the curve of the wood is attached.
Then suspend something heavy from above it, so that it extends itself downward. Then the physician should equalize the fracture with his hands at the same time, until the fracture returns according to what is necessary.
And the other method is that the sick person should be laid on his back; and suspend his hand from his neck with a bandage. Then order two assistants, that one of them should hold that which is above the fracture with his hands; and that the other should hold below it, and each should extend towards his own side.
And if you wish for there to be stronger extension, then bind below the fracture with a ligature, and above it with another ligature; and let each of the two assistants extend them to their two parts.
Therefore if the fracture is near the extremity of the humerus, it is necessary that one ligature be placed below the acromion, and another below the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow: then it is necessary that a ligature be placed above that location, and above the elbow itself.
Then equalize the fracture with ease and without labor, until when the fracture is equalized according to what is necessary, and a good dressing is applied; then bind it, if there does not occur a hot abscess.
But if a hot abscess occurs, then loosen the binding until the seventh day. And place upon it wool cut and soaked in vinegar and rose oil, until when the abscess subsides; then bind it; and the method of binding it is that you put a plaster over the fracture.
Then place a wrapping from new cloth over the plaster. Then let him bring his arm up onto the supporting aid and place his hand open upon his shoulder.
And place a cloth and bind it over the supporting arm so that the arm stands in the place of the stars; if nothing prevents you from this, nor does anything change upon you from the broken bone.
But if you fear that something may change upon you from the broken bone, then use a splint; and it is that you place upon the fracture itself a splint which is wider and stronger than the other splints. And place a finger's breadth between every splint; and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers on each side.
Then bind over the splints with a binding such as I have described at the beginning of the chapter.
And let your bandage be tighter over the place of the fracture. And the longer the fracture is, let the bandage be less tight.
Therefore if you see the arrangement of the stars and the bandage, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the limb immediately do this: and if you fear a hot abscess then loosen the bandage and the splints until the seventh day, as we have said.
Then consider the bandage every three days so that itching or swelling does not occur in the place, or food be prevented from reaching the limb because of the excessive tightness of the bandage. Therefore correct all of it according to what we have said.
But if you are confident that nothing will happen from it then do not loosen the bandage except after three days or more.
And let the sick man sleep on his back and his hand on his stomach; and place under him a bolster full of wool evenly.
And consider every hour of the night or day that the shape of the broken limb is not loosened or the bandage softened. Therefore correct all of it with your power.
And give the sick man food according to the order we have previously prescribed so that it is delicate food at first until his mouth begins to tighten then it is necessary to increase his food.
For by custom the helper and leg tighten for forty days; therefore it is necessary that it be loosened and a bath be given and treated with ointments that correct it.
But if the fracture is foul and crushed then do not loosen the bandage and splints from it until fifty days and up to two months.
Concerning the restoration of a broken arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called two humeri.
One of them is small and it is that which follows the thumb. The other is large and it is that which is placed below the small one from the lower part.
Perhaps therefore only the larger bone is broken, or perhaps the smaller one; and perhaps they are broken together.
When therefore the smaller upper bone is broken, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the lower bone is broken, its fracture is bad, and its healing difficult.
And worse it is when the two bones are broken together.
If therefore the bone which is broken is the smaller upper one, then it suits the doctor at its restoration to put a small extension with ease until it equals it.
If however the larger bone is that which is broken: then it is necessary that he put a stronger strapping greatly.
And it is necessary that he put the figure of the hand at its restoration, and its extended extension upon a cushion. And let the thumb of the hand be higher towards the superiors than all the fingers; and let the lower joint be lower than all the fingers, or the rest; and let the weak one sitting squarely upon himself, and let the cushion be before him, or in his straight line, at a height so that the weak one does not incur labor.
Then let the attendant extend the arm from the lower part, or with his hand, or with a bandage. And let another attendant extend similarly from above.
Then let the doctor equalize the bone until he reduces it according to the best figure as he can.
Which if there are splinters in the fracture of the bone, then try to reduce every fragment into its place with your strength.
If however a separated splinter appears in it and pricks the skin, and there is no hope for you in its restoration, then cut above it, and remove it according to the way which we said in those things which were mentioned before.
If there is a fracture with a wound, I have already made a separate chapter for it, therefore take its treatment from there.
If a hot abscess should occur at the beginning of your restoration, then make a linen cloth with cerate made from rose oil and white wax, and let it be medium in thickness between thinness and thickness; and bind the cloth over it with a fine bandage until the abscess subsides: then remove the cerate and apply a plaster prepared from millstone powder with egg white. Then put on splints, and let the splint that is placed over the fracture itself be a little wider and stronger.
And know that the number of splints for the arm is six in most arrangements: whether there be a fracture in one focus or in two foci at the same time.
Then place your bandage over the place of fracture stronger and tighter, and somewhat more so with a bandage above the fracture or below it; or place a softer bandage a little less tight than the previous one according to the previous recollection of it at the beginning of the chapter.
And let the cloths that are wrapped over the fracture be soft, damp cloths; and let them not be hard or rough. And let the thread with which it is tied be of flax properly, medium between fine and coarse as we have described.
And consider the limb and bandage after a few days. If something should happen which requires correction, such as itching that occurs in the limb: then it is necessary to embrocate the limb with warm water until that itching subsides and let the limb be unbound until it quiets, then repeat the bandage.
If the bandage has already become softened and the bone already moved and similar things: then correct all that with your skill and consider it again.
For if nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive tightness of the bandage, then it is necessary to loosen it a little and let it be for several days until nourishment flows to it, then bind it again.
If, however, none of these things which we have mentioned happen to the sick person, then it is not necessary that he be untied, except after twenty days, or thereabouts.
Then let the hand of the sick person be suspended at his neck. And let his neck be equal, and let it be guarded by its own strength from agitated movements. And make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days, or in thirty-two days; and perhaps it is restored in twenty-eight days. All of that is according to the dispositions of complexions, and the dispositions of strength.
Concerning the restoration of fractures of the hand.
Know that fractures of the bones of the hand and the nodes of the fingers rarely occur. And it does not happen to them except through much attrition.
When therefore a fracture or attrition of the bone occurs, then it is necessary that the sick person sits squarely; and let there be a seat in front of him according to equality. Then place his hand upon it extended.
Then let the assistant extend the broken bones, and let the physician equalize them until they are joined in good union.
Then it is necessary that he put on a plaster and a bandage, if there does not occur a hot abscess. Then place a splint upon it according to the quantity of the place; and you have already enclosed it in linen cloth.
But if the fracture is at the lower parts around the belly of the bone, then make a sphere like shape out of cloth; and command the sick person to press upon it with his broken bone; then let it be tied with a long cloth.
And let the splint be of leather, in which there is softness, so that the leather may be applied with the body of the bone; and bind it according to what is necessary.
If however the fracture is external, then it is necessary that you place a splint on top and another splint from below onto the sole of the foot; and let the hand be open and straight. Then apply a bandage, as the hand is turned over; and extend it between the fingers with a ligament.
But if it should happen that a fracture occurs to any of the knuckles of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, it should be set according to what is necessary. Then bind it with the sole; and if you wish, place a straight small splint for it so that the fracture is elevated and does not move.
But if the fracture is in the remaining fingers, such as the middle finger and index finger, or ring finger and little finger, then it should be set and bound with the sound finger that follows it; or they should all be bound according to their sequence and this is better. Or place a small splint on top of it, as we said regarding the thumb.
And consider in your restoration and after the arrangement of a warm poultice; oppose it with what is necessary when something occurs from it, according to how its account is repeated.
Concerning the restoration of a fractured hip.
The hip bone is often fractured and it is made known to the senses because it turns towards the inner and posterior part.
And its restoration is done in this way, that a bandage is applied above the fracture and another bandage below the fracture. And the patient should lie face down.
Then let all the bandages be extended by the attendant to their own side according to equality; and this when there is a fracture in the middle of the bone.
But if the fracture is near the root of the hip, then let the bandage be towards the side of the breastbone so that the extension falls upwards; and another bandage below the fracture.
And so similarly if there is a fracture near the knee, then let there be a bandage near the knee, so that there is extension towards the lower parts.
Then let the doctor equalize the bone with both of his hands, until he reduces it according to the likeness of the natural shape; and let the bone be joined with a good conjunction.
Then it is necessary that you put on a plaster and binding, if there does not happen an abscess to the limb. But if it should happen that there is an abscess in it: then let it alone for several days until the hot abscess subsides, then return to your treatment.
The binding of it however should be like this. It is necessary that you wrap a hard bandage over the fracture, that is, a binding; and double it two or three times; and let there remain an excess from it. Then wrap the leg until you reach the heel at the root of the thigh.
And insert a long thread between the hip and leg near the knee toward the lower parts, and let the ends of the thread come from the upper part of the two parts. Then revolve over the leg and hip what is left over from the bandage.
Then put on the hip in the place of the fracture itself splints, and put one splint from them over the bone of the leg.
Then fill the spaces between the leg and hip with soft cloths so that the binding is equal.
Then begin with a strong binding from the middle over the place of the fracture with three or four wrappings. And the more you extend with the bandage from the place of the fracture, let your binding be smaller and softer, and gentler.
Then attend to the two ends of the thread which you have inserted between the thigh and the leg. Therefore tie three ligatures with both, which are above. Then go with the two ends of the thread to the lower parts until you reach the heel. And with both, tighten also the ends of the ligatures from the other side so that the ligament is not removed from its place.
Then release the constriction upon it while it remains so that neither corrosion nor abscess nor swelling nor anything like them may happen to the limb. But if anything of that sort should happen. Hurry then with its solution and correct everything which arises from it entirely according to what we have said many times.
But if there is a bone splinter in the bone which pierces then it is necessary that you equalize it if it is possible for you. And if not, cut over it and remove it; and take care of it as we have previously mentioned until it heals.
And when this fracture of the hip is bound up besides adding ligatures to it as we have said in aiding and the arm.
Truly however in its restoration thus fractured infirmity does not happen. And if it is restored alone besides which the other leg is applied to it then it is necessary that he who owns it limps always.
And know that the hip is bound up for fifty days or a little more or less; all of it depends according to diversity of complexions and other dispositions.
Concerning the restoration of a fracture of the knee cap.
Know that a fracture of the knee cap rarely happens but attrition happens to it many times.
But if a fracture should happen to it then it is not anything except either a fissure or a hole in its parts. And it is with a wound, and without a wound. And it is established over all of that with sense.
And its restoration is such that it equals what has been disrupted from its parts with fingers, until it is assembled and joined according to what is possible from equality and facility and construction.
Then put a plaster from sesame flour, or mill, with white of egg; and put a round star on top of it if it needs that; and bind it securely with a fitting bandage for that.
Then consider all the arrangements which we have narrated in other fractures: such as a warm poultice, and things similar to it; so that you oppose every accident with what suits it until it is healed.
Concerning the restoration of a leg fracture.
Know that the leg has two bones, one of which is thick and is called the Tibia; and the other thin, and is called the Fibula.
And it happens to both of these kinds of fractures what happens to the two bones of the arm; and because of that its restoration is done equally as the restoration of the arm, and the operation is one.
If both bones are broken together, the leg is turned in all directions.
And if the thinner bone is broken, the leg is turned to the front part.
And if the thicker bone is broken, you will find it lower down; and it is among those things that are not hidden from you.
Then administer extension, and equality, and binding of splints according to that equally.
However it is necessary, if the leg fracture is a foul one, having many shards: that the extension be smaller and gentler in its alleviation by you.
And indeed in the leg there is something from the operation above the arm; and it is that when you equalize the splints and complete all your operation, then take two bands from pine wood which is used in the making of sun-dials which are put under tables; and they are made from spatulae palms; and choose from them those which have a small thickness, and are neither too thin: and let their length be according to the length of the leg from the knee down.
Then wrap a cloth around each one with two wrappings according to its length. And place one part of the leg from one side and the other from the other side; and let them be from the knee down to the foot.
Then tie two bandages in three places from the two ends and the middle. For when constriction is prohibited, the leg inclines to the right and left, and stands in a good position.
And now indeed let a cradle be made of wood according to the length of the leg, and let the leg be placed in it so that it preserves it from motion.
And indeed it is very necessary that you do this when there is a fracture with a proper wound.
Then consider the leg every day, and strive with the utmost care against a collection of pus, or swelling, or any other things. If therefore anything from those things should happen, then oppose it with what is necessary, until it heals, if God wills.
On the fracture of foot bones and toes.
A fracture does not truly happen to the heel bone.
However, a fracture sometimes happens to the foot bones and rarely to the toes; it does not happen to them except by friction in many positions.
If a fracture happens to the foot bones, and you see those bones rise up over each other, then let the sick person place their foot on prepared ground as if walking.
Then stand and place your foot on that which rises from those bones; then press or tread it down, and equalize it until it returns to its place.
Then put on a plaster and a wad over it; and put a small board under the sole of the foot, which has two flat heads.
Then bind it with a decent bandage after you wrap it with cloths and other things that it needs.
Therefore when three or four days have passed, then untie the ligature. For you will find the bones equalized, whether they are broken or dislocated. Therefore the operation on them is as you see.
But if some fingers are broken, then restore them and equalize them according to what I have told you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. Then place a splint with your finger according to the length of the finger, and let it be slightly wider; then place under the foot this board which I have told you about, and bind it with a proper constriction.
But if what is broken from the bones are two, or three, or more, then place a splint of its own size over each finger, wrapped in linen cloth; and bind the board under the foot; and let it stand on one head of the board outside the belly of the foot, so that it holds with good retention.
And it behooves you not to forget, but to consider all that I have told you in the remaining fractures from the accidents we mentioned; and oppose every accident with what is necessary.
Concerning the fracture of a woman's vulva, and the breastbone, and a man's clavicle.
When a woman's vulva is fractured, then have her sit square. Then incline her slightly to the back of herself, and let it be held back.
Then let the midwife fill her vulva with cotton until she fills it; and let it be made in the vulva like a sphere.
Then let the woman be shaken, and raise her back gradually. For that cotton will come out until it becomes before the vulva like a sphere, and the broken bone will return.
Then place a cushion on her back. Therefore, when he wants to urinate, remove the bandage with ease, then let him urinate; and insert it again in the same way that you first introduced it; then let him return to his first pillow.
Let him do this for seven days or so, for the mouth itself is restored.
And if you wish, take a bladder of a goat, and fasten upon its opening a reed tube, and introduce the whole bladder into his vulva. Then blow into the tube with force until the bladder is inflated inside the vulva, for the fracture will reunite.
Then fill it with cotton and let it remain for several days, as we have related, until it is healed.
And when the breastbone of a man or woman is broken, then apply in its restoration and in its setting what we have related about the bone of the jaw.
And do not conceal the rectum in these neighboring fractures which rarely occur, especially if someone has some study or use for it.
And understand this book of mine well, for the fracture itself indicates to you in many positions the straight way in its restoration and setting; therefore understand.
But when the penis of a man is broken, take the gullet of a goose, and insert the penis into it. Then place upon it a bandage of cloth, and let it be wrapped, and let it remain for three days or so, and it will be healed, if God wills.
On the restoration of bone fractures when there is a wound.
It is fitting for someone who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the hip bone, or the thigh bone, or similar to them, that you hurry and bleed him immediately; if the conditions for bloodletting are confirmed to you, as we have previously stated.
If a wound bleeds, you must hurry to cut it off so that you sprinkle powdered rue upon it. If you do not have rue at hand, use something else.
Then begin to set the fracture on that same day and do not delay it unless an abscess occurs.
But if a hot abscess occurs, then postpone the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess subsides. And do not approach it on the third or fourth day at all, for you would cause bad things to happen to him.
But if the broken bone is prominent above the skin exposed; then you must try to reduce it and equalize it with your hands with little force and extension.
But if its extension and equalization are not prepared by your hands; then reduce it with this instrument. And it is an instrument made of iron, whose length is the quantity of seven or eight fingers; and its width is according to the quantity of the wound. And for this reason it is necessary for the physician to take three or four of them according to the quantity he needs for its treatment in every kind of fracture.
And let it be round; and let there be a small thickness so that it is not doubled upon compression on it during the hour of the operation; and let it have sharp extremities, with an edge at its ends. And let its upper part be thick from its middle to its lower parts.
And this is its shape.
It is necessary in this operation that the sharp curved extremity of it be placed upon the extremity of the prominent bone; and press it with it together, until when the bone returns and equalizes by some equalization.
Therefore try to equalize the extremities of the fracture to each other.
If the extremities of it are slender and do not receive good acceptance by the instrument; then it is necessary that you cut the extremity of that bone until the instrument has power over it.
If you are unable to reduce them entirely with what we have said, then cut it with the appropriate instruments which we have described in the chapter on Incisions; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever way is possible for you.
Then scrape away what remains in the bone from roughness and fine scales.
Therefore, when the bone is reduced and the patient experiences intense, agonizing pain after its reduction, know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
Do it again. For you confer a great benefit on the patient when you complete the restoration that you are doing to the bone.
Then soak a cloth in black astringent wine. Especially if it is summer. And do not place anything on the wound that contains wax or oil so as not to cause putrefaction and corruption in it.
Then administer stars at the hour of your restoration of the bone. And leave the wound uncovered; so that you may cut a hole with forceps according to the amount of the wound.
And be careful not to tighten the wound with a fracture. For foolish physicians have often done this and caused death, corruption, or gangrene, that is, suppuration, in their patients. And let your bandage be soft, gentle, different from the bandages of other fractures.
If the wound is bad or large and you fear some of the bad things that we have mentioned, and you find pain suspended in the place: then it is not necessary to place stars on it. And make compresses from hard cloths in place of the stars and bind it with them.
But when, after one or two days, you see the wound beginning to fester: then remove the cloth that you placed on it with wine. Then apply linen cloths and ointments with which we are accustomed to healing wounds, such as the tetrapharmacon ointment and those similar to it.
And it behooves you to loosen the ligature. And consider the wound every day in the morning and evening until it consolidates and heals.
And it is necessary that the limb be prepared so that pus flows from it to the lower parts with ease.
And if many days pass by the wound and it does not consolidate nor is pus separated from it, then know that there are small bone fragments there. Therefore it is necessary that you inquire into the wound with touch. How many indeed of those fragments are separated, remove them and extract them. And those which are not separated and prick the limb and cause pain to occur, try to cut into them and remove them in every way possible for you to do so.
And if it should happen that the wound develops a suppuration or an ulceration, that is, eschar, or another type of corruption and putrefaction: then it is necessary that you oppose to each one of them with what suits it from its treatment, of which there was previous mention in its chapter.
And from that on which my speech must stand and to which you should make your mind present when a bone is broken and protrudes above the limb, such as the hip bone, and the femur, and those similar to them from large limbs: it is, that you not presume its attraction, for very often death results from it, but rather let it be until it putrefies.
For perhaps it will fall off by itself after twenty days or thirty.
Then therefore care for the wound if it seems to you, and if not, let it be.
On the treatment of Nodulation in the wake of a fracture.
Often this swelling occurs in the course of healing a fracture. Especially that which is near the joints: and it spoils the shape of the limb from it. And perhaps it prevents the limb from its natural operation.
Therefore consider then, if the swelling is recent: administer to it medicines which have astringency, such as aloe, and frankincense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, and acacia, and those similar to them.
So that you take some of these, or all of them: and prepare them with astringent wine, or with egg white, or with vinegar: and place them upon the swelling in a compress, and bind them well over it.
And leave the binding, and do not loosen it for many days. Then loosen it, and repeat another, until the swelling is removed.
Or bind over it a sheet of lead somewhat slantwise. For lead has the property of removing everything that is feared from the limbs.
But if the swelling has already turned to stone, and is tight, and urgent necessity quickly arises to remove it: then make an incision upon its upper part, and cut off the excess that protrudes: or shave it with certain razors until it is removed: and attend to it until it heals.
Concerning the treatment when restoration occurs, and the limb remains after that slender, not according to its nature.
When a fracture of a bone is restored, and the limb remains after that slender, weak: then it does not happen except for many causes. One of which is the multitude of loosening of ligaments and their ligation not as it ought to be: or because of excess tightness of ligatures of the limbs until nourishment is prevented from flowing to the limb: or because of a multitude of unnecessary embrocations at an unfitting time: or because of a scarcity of blood in the body of the sick person, and its weakness.
And its treatment is to feed it soft food and make its body tender until blood multiplies within it. And administer a bath. And introduce joy and happiness upon it.
Then place pitch on the limb so that the pitch draws much nourishment to it. And continually embrocate it with warm water until nourishment flows and it returns to its natural shape.
On the treatment of broken bones when they are rejoined crooked.
When it happens that crookedness and prominence of the broken bone, or a knot, occurs in a limb already rejoined after its healing, and the shape of the limb is marred, yet the limb is not prevented from its natural operation, then you ought not to heed him who thinks it should be broken again.
And there have already been many stupid doctors and setters who did that in our land.
And this operation is truly very blameworthy, leading to death or great fear, so that it may be mortal.
But if the limping and knotting are recent, then it is necessary that it be embrocated with warm water in which softening herbs have been boiled, such as the leaves and root of the marshmallow plant, melilot, and those similar to them. And let a plaster be made for it with a softening plaster, such as well-made diachylon.
Or take the mucilage of the marshmallow root and shake it with chicken fat or sesame oil and apply a plaster with it.
Or take plump figs and grind them with dove's dung and similar things which are called in medicine those that lessen consolidation.
And sometimes the knot is loosened with continual, old, and gentle rubbing done with wet hands. And motion of the limb should be given to all parts in every hour.
If, however, the tortuosity has already preceded and become strong, and has been converted into a stone, and necessity has been provoked to cure it with iron: then it is necessary that it be cut above it, and the continuity of the bone be loosened, and what overflows from the knot or bone be cut down with fine incisors; and facility be administered in it with solicitude and zeal.
On Speech in Dislocation.
Dislocation is the exit of any joint from its place. Therefore it is prohibited from its motion and the figure of the limb is spoiled. And it causes intense pains and vehement injuries to befall the weak one.
Therefore when dislocation happens to anyone, then it is necessary to hurry to its restoration and not delay it at all.
For if it is delayed, the place becomes inflamed, and perhaps with it, the reduction of the dislocation.
Therefore it is not necessary for it to be moved or extended in the hour of its inflammation. For very often it causes a spasm and painful injuries to happen.
But when that happens, then it is necessary for you to hasten to the phlebotomy of the weak one. Then let him be dismissed until the inflammation subsides.
Then let the limb be embrocated with warm water and oil. Then let it be reduced with ease.
And let the whole limb be cared for along with that whose remembrance will come into its place.
I have indeed already arranged the chapters on dislocation, even according to what preceded in the fracture, from the upper part of the body down to its lower part.
On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
Rarely are the two jaws dislocated unless rarely.
And dislocation of both occurs according to one of two methods. For they are either removed from their places by a small removal, and softened for a short time. Or they are dislocated by a complete dislocation, until they are softened to the part of the chest, until the saliva of the sick person flows, and he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is involved with speech.
But when its dislocation is small, then it returns in several positions by itself with little effort.
But if it is a complete, total dislocation, then it is necessary that its reduction be administered quickly, and not delayed at all: and it is for the attendant to hold the head of the sick person: and for the physician to insert the thumb of one of his hands into the root of the jaw of the dislocation between his mouth, if the dislocation is on one side. Or he should insert his two thumbs together, if the dislocation is on both sides. And let the remaining fingers of his hands be outside, with which he equalizes.
And instruct the sick person to cleanse his jaws, and open them for eating in every direction. And the physician equalizes the jaw, and drives the jaw until it returns to its place.
But if its reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are together: then administer vaporization with warm water, and oil, until an easy reduction of both is made: and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we said.
When therefore they return and are equalized, and the mouth of the sick person is closed, and they are not softened: then put poultices of cloths on them, with cerate that is made from wax: and rose oil.
Then it is bound with ease with soft bandages.
And let the sleep of the sick person be on his back: and let his head stand between two pillows, so that he does not move it to the right and left: nor does he attempt, or is forced, to chew anything: rather let his food be given soft drinks, until when the pains are removed, and the jaw is set: then let him eat what he wants, and let it be administered with ease.
He should not work on the operation of his own mouth at eating and drinking, and kissing, until the mandible is healed.
If the reduction of the two mandibles becomes difficult when they are dislocated at some hour and do not return to their places, then fevers and frequent sweats often occur, and perhaps the bowels of the sick person are loosened and perhaps he vomits pure bile.
Therefore when you see this, know that it is ruin and very often he to whom this happens dies within ten days.
Concerning the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and extremity of the humerus.
The clavicle indeed does not dislocate from the inner side on account of its continuity with the chest. And it sometimes dislocates to the outside and that is declared to the senses.
And its restoration is for the sick person to lie on his back and extend his arms. Then constrict the place with your palm in a strong constriction, for it will return itself.
Then put a plaster on it and compresses and bind it.
The extremities indeed which follow the elbow and are continued with it, do not dislocate except rarely. And if it dislocates on some day then it is necessary that it be reduced and equalized according to what we have said and what is prepared for you.
Then put a plaster on it and compresses and binding. And enjoin the sick person to adhere to quiet and rest until he is healed.
And with this same treatment the extremity of the humerus is reduced when it is separated even from its place.
Concerning the reduction of the dislocation of the humerus.
Know that the humerus does not dislocate except according to three ways.
One of them is to dislocate it towards the side of the tarsus below. The second is to dislocate it towards the side of the chest. And perhaps it may be dislocated to the upper part of the humerus; and that happens rarely.
And it does not dislocate backwards because of the spatula. And it does not dislocate forwards because of the nerves.
And indeed it most often dislocates and comes out below towards the tarsus; especially in those who have little flesh. Because it goes out quickly in them and goes in quickly.
But in those who have much flesh, it is the opposite of that, that is because it goes out with difficulty and goes in with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some people a blow or a fall and the humerus becomes inflamed with hot inflammation and it is thought because of that, that it has already been dislocated.
Therefore it is necessary for you to test it until you stand upon the certainty of it and then proceed in its treatment.
And dislocation is known when it is below towards the tarsus; and distinguish between a dislocated humerus and a sound humerus. For you find a manifest difference between them and you find in the head of the humerus a concavity and under the tarsus at the touch the head of the humerus as if it were an egg itself; and the weak one cannot reduce his hand to his ear nor move it with all motions.
And similarly, if it dislocates towards the chest or upwards then you find a manifest touch and it is not concealed.
And the reduction of this dislocation is easily made when it is recent or the weak one is a boy.
And its reduction is to raise the minister's hand upwards. Then place your thumbs under his humerus, and elevate the joint with strength upwards to its place; and let the assistant raise his hand and extend it upwards. Then let him put it lower, for he quickly returns.
But if he does not return through that which we said, and there are many days from the beginning of the dislocation; then it is necessary that the infirm person bathe in hot water, and an embrocation be administered which softens and soothes, such as if the roots of althea, and fenugreek, and melilot are decocted in water, and it is administered.
Then let the infirm person be laid on his back; and let a sphere and wool be placed under his humerus, which is equal between softness and firmness.
Then let the physician place his heel on the sphere, and elevate the head of the humerus with force, and draw the hand of the infirm person downwards.
And if you wish, reduce him according to this method; and it is that you make a man who is taller than the infirm person be present, and let him stand on the side, and insert his shoulder under the humerus of the infirm person; and elevate the humerus of him upwards until the infirm person is suspended in the air. And let another assistant draw the hand of the infirm person downwards to the belly. But if the infirm person is light; then it is necessary that he be suspended with something else, so that it weighs him down; for the dislocation returns immediately.
And it is reduced also according to another method; and it is that a long piece of wood be fixed into the ground, whose head is round in shape; such as the handle of a mortar; which is neither thick nor thin. Then let it be placed under the infirm person after soft cloths are placed on the head of the wood; and let the infirm person stand according to the length of the wood.
Then his hand should be extended downwards on one side, and his body should be extended on the other side with force; for the juncture returns to its place with speed.
But if its reduction is difficult by all that we have said, then use this care: and it is, that you should take a piece of wood whose length is the measure of two arms, and whose width is the measure of four fingers, and whose thickness is the measure of two fingers: to which there should be a round head, so that its entry into the depth of the wound may be eased, according to this form.
Then soft cloths should be tied over the round head so that the wood does not injure the weak flesh.
Then let it be placed under the weak limb so that the hand or arm may be extended upon the wood up to the lower parts; and let the wood be tied upon the support and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Then let the arm be placed upon the step of a ladder by its width, and let the hand be extended downwards, and let the rest of the body be left hanging from the other side. For the juncture enters immediately.
When therefore its entry is completed according to whichever way is possible; then it is necessary that you should place under the limb a sphere of equal size from wool. Then put a plaster prepared from the powder of millstone with frankincense and white of egg over the whole shoulder as it revolves from above.
Then bind under the limb a decent bandage; and let the bandage be wound over the plaster from above; and attach his hand to his own neck and let it go, and do not move his hand for seven days.
And it is necessary that little food be given to the weak one until the limb is strengthened; for it is quicker towards its healing.
Then a wider bandage should be put on after seven days or five, and he should be raised with motion. If therefore it is hardened and not softened, then it is already healed.
But if the joint is dislocated many times, because of the moisture that happens to it, or because of some other cause: then it is necessary that a cautery with three holes be applied to it, according to what was said previously in the chapter on cautery.
And if this is all done, and the ligament is loosened after seven days, and the joint is not confirmed, and the plaster and bandage are put back on it several times, and it does not become firm, and it falls, and it cannot lift itself to the upper parts: then you should know that its nerves which are at the head of the shoulder have already been cut, or stretched, or softened: and you should know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
But the reduction of a dislocation which occurs towards the chest and nipple, or to the back, is done with a push and extension with the hands: until it returns, and the rest of the bandage and care are applied to it, until it is healed.
And if it should happen after healing that there is heaviness in the limb, and slowness in its motion, then let the weak person bathe many times, until that heaviness is eased, and it returns to its first nature.
On the treatment of elbow dislocation.
Know that the elbow joint dislocates with difficulty, and similarly returns with difficulty also: and indeed it dislocates to all sides, and especially to the front, or to the back.
And its dislocation is not hidden from you: for it falls under sight, and under touch, according to whichever figure it dislocates. And when you join the dislocated elbow with the sound one, it is declared to you manifestly. For the joint is hollowed, and the arm cannot bend, nor touch its shoulder with it.
And it is necessary that you hurry and reduce the dislocation immediately, before hot abscess occurs to him.
For if a hot abscess should occur to him, its reduction becomes difficult and perhaps it does not heal at all, especially when it is toward the back. For it is worse than all kinds of dislocations and more severe in pain for them, and death often comes with it.
And its restoration when it is from those which are possible to reduce, is that his hand be extended with two hands and his arm be spread out, and the hands of the doctor be above the elbow and below it, and he himself presses the joint with the thumbs of his hands together, or with the base of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Or truly the dislocation is forward: then it returns thus, that he doubles his hand with his own hand until he strikes with the base of his palm the elbow which is dislocated.
But if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer strong, powerful extension and it is that two assistants extend the arm, and two other assistants hold it also so that it does not move during the extension.
Then let the arm be revolved to every part after it is enveloped with a long doubled cloth over his hand, or a wide bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, let him anoint it with oil so that it may be among those which assist in lubricating the joint with ease. Then he presses the joint with a strong thrust until it returns.
And after its reduction it is necessary that a plaster be placed upon it, in which there is astringency and drying with white of egg, and let it be bound with a decent bandage. And let the arm be suspended from the neck of the sick man, and let it rest for several days.
Then let it be unbound. If therefore the union is established in its place, then untie the ligature from it, and let it go.
And if you see that the union is not well tightened, then repeat the plaster and the ligature, and let it go for several days until it tightens. Then untie it.
But if gravity occurs to it after reduction of the union, and the disposition is in motion: then administer moistening in a bath, and subtle friction, and compression, until it is aligned, or place upon the union iliati, that is, the fat tail of a ram. Then it is ligated, and let it go upon it day and night. Then remove it, and introduce it into a bath. When therefore it sweats, then rub the union with temperate friction. Then repeat upon it iliati juice once, and a second time, and a third time with entry into the bath, until it is softened.
And if you wish, place upon it cow dung, moist, warmed with butter, and bind above it.
Do that several times. For it is softened, and returns to its own disposition.
On the treatment of dislocation by Albucasis.
Albucasis often dislocates the hand, that is, the union which is between the arm and the hand.
And the reduction of its dislocation is easy. Contrary to the other unions. However it is necessary that swiftness be in the reduction of its dislocation in the hour in which it is dislocated, before an abscess forms there: or hot inflammation occurs in it.
And the reduction of the dislocation in it is that you place Albucasis's hand of the injured side upon a table, and let an assistant extend his hand: and let the doctor place his palm upon the prominence of the union, and push it until it returns.
However, it is necessary that it be considered, if the palm has already receded to the belly of the hand: then let the patient place the back of his hand upon the table at extension and reduction; and if the dislocation proceeds to the back of the hand, then let the position of his hand be intrinsically upon the table, that is, let the inner part of his hand be placed upon the table so that the hand of the physician may fall upon the prominence of the joint.
Therefore if it returns immediately, it is good; and if not, then bind it with a soothing plaster poultice; and dismiss him, and do not touch it further.
For if he does not tolerate it, nor can you effect its reduction after days have passed, nevertheless the joint remains according to its crookedness; and it does not harm the patient anything except that his hand is softened, and he cannot grasp anything; then know that the nerves are cut or rubbed.
There is therefore no remedy in this except to burn it with a cautery near its location. And perhaps it does not bring about anything.
Therefore when Almahassem does not return, then place upon it a plaster which we have described. Then let it be bound, and dismissed for five days; afterwards let it be loosened and dismissed, and let the hand be exercised.
But if its motion is deprived, and heaviness occurs therein, then soften it with warm water and frequent rubbing until it is softened.
Concerning the Treatment of Dislocations of the Fingers.
When a finger is dislocated from it to any part, or a finger to the back of the palm, or its belly: then extend the finger and press the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
Then support the head of the finger, and suspend it toward the part to which it is dislocated, and dismiss him for two days.
Then suspend him and extend it until the straight part is equal to its length that day.
Therefore when it is night bind it according to the very account and do not cease to loosen it in the day and exercise it with motion and bind it at night.
Do that for several days until it tightens.
And do likewise with it if it is dislocated toward the belly of the hand and bind it to the same part and perform your first operation on it until it is healed.
And do likewise with it when it is dislocated to the other parts.
Concerning the Treatment of Dislocation of the Backbone.
When it happens to someone that the backbone or neck is completely dislocated, or many vertebrae are removed from their places, then there is no cure in it because death hastens for the weak one.
And the sign of it is that the excretion of the weak one comes out without volition and he cannot hold it and many times some members are loosened from him or two legs or two arms of him or one of them or a vertebra is removed from its place.
Very often it is removed, because very often the removal happens to four parts.
That therefore which is removed toward the back is called a hump.
The cure for it, however, is that you consider then if the hump occurs from boyhood then there is no cure in it nor healing at all from it.
In that which occurs from a fall or a blow or similar things, the ancients already said modes of treatment in lengthy speech. Most of which does not return with benefit.
I, however, have already shortened it from that which excuses little of it because of its proximity to my intention and by my exposition in which I exposed it and formed its instrument in a different way from that which they showed and exposed.
Therefore, I say that in hunchback which occurs from the front part, there is neither skill nor healing from it.
And similarly in that which happens on both sides also.
And it is not cured from them except that which occurs in the back properly with that which I relate: and it is, that the weak one be extended upon his face upon an equal platform near the wall: and let a wet straw mat be spread under him so that his chest is not injured.
Then let a straight piece of wood be placed fixed in a hole in the ground, at the extremity of the platform, around his head: and another piece of wood around his feet at the other extremity of the platform: and let an assistant hold the wood, and let it not be fastened in the hole. And let another assistant hold the other one.
Then wind a soft, strong bandage over the head of the weak one, and under his nipples: and extend the end of the bandage to the wood which is by his head: and bind it to it.
Then bind another bandage above his hips, and above his knees, and at his ankles. Then gather all the bandages together, and bind them to the other wood which is by his feet.
Then let all the assistants extend toward the wood a bandage, and let the two woods not be removed from their places in which they are fixed: nevertheless let them not be fastened, as we said.
And the doctor place his hands upon the spine with force until it returns: or he may place upon it a board. Then he annexes his feet upon the board until it returns.
But if it does not return by this treatment, then take a board whose length is about three arm-spans. And make a hole in the wall of which we said that it is near the weak one, a place into which the extremity of the board may enter. Then place the middle of the board over the spine. And let the doctor put his feet on the other extremity. And bind it well until the spine is constricted and returns to its place.
Then if you wish, operate with a tourniquet which is enclosed with your hand and it is as follows: fix at the head of the sick person on the last step two pieces of wood, each the length of one arm; and at the head of him on the last step two pieces of wood.
Let the length between each piece of wood be one palm; and now a hole has been made in every place where the tourniquet passes; and let all the wood be firmly fixed in the ground so that it does not move at all.
And insert a round piece of wood; and this is the tourniquet in which the ligature revolves in two holes of the two pieces of wood.
And at its extremity there is a hole in which wood is fixed, the length of which is a palm with that which revolves; and similarly in the two other pieces of wood.
Then tighten the ligatures which you bound on the chest of the sick person with the tourniquet which is at his head; and the ligatures which you bound on his legs with the tourniquet which is at his feet.
Then let an assistant stand by each tourniquet who turns his hand with a handle with which the tourniquet revolves; and the doctor aligns the spine as we have said.
This is the form of the tourniquet which follows.
Then after the spine returns and the place is equalized, it is necessary that you apply a drying plaster with egg white. Then a compress. Afterwards place on the plaster an splint of wood, whose width is three fingers or thereabouts. And its length such a quantity that it takes in the place of the gibbosity and above the sound part of the spine.
Then it is bound with the ligature which we have said. And the weak person shall use delicate nourishment until he is healed.
And if something of a protuberance should remain in the place at the end of healing, then it is necessary that medicines which soften and soothe be administered, with the application of the plate which we have described for a long time. And now a lead plate is applied to that place.
And sometimes a prominence occurs at the last vertebra of the back and it is thought to be a dislocation, and that is the bone which now protrudes. Therefore it is not necessary for an assumption to be made regarding this with this medicine, for it might perhaps cause death.
Concerning the treatment of a dislocated jaw.
Know that dislocations of the jaw and shoulder do not occur unless there is a dislocation: nor does what occurs to other joints from a small removal and concavity happen to them.
And the joint of the jaw dislocates according to four parts. Which is because it dislocates anteriorly and posteriorly.
And most often it dislocates inwardly, and rarely dislocates anteriorly and posteriorly.
And the treatment for its dislocation inwards is as follows: when you join the leg of the healthy person with the injured person's leg it is longer; and his knee is more prominent than that of the healthy person, and he cannot bend his foot at the groin; and the place following the groin is swollen with a hot poultice, because the head of the femur has already arrived there.
And the sign of him to whom a dislocation outward occurs is that these accidents are the opposite of those accidents.
And the sign of him to whom a dislocation forward occurs is that he stretches out his healthy leg according to its complement; but he cannot bend it without pain which is in the knee: and if he attempts to walk, he cannot step forward on it; and his urine is retained, and his groin becomes swollen, and at walking there is a stepping by him on his heel.
The sign of him to whom dislocation happens posteriorly is that he does not extend his knee, nor can he bend it forward before bending his groin; and his leg is also shorter than the other; and his groin is softened, and the head of his femur is at the place of the ilium.
The reduction, however, of this species of dislocation is that you consider then, if the dislocation is old, which has already grown old with him having it. Then if you administer the reduction of it, and it remains according to its own arrangement: then there is no cure at all in it. Therefore, one ought not presume a complete recovery for him.
But in him whose dislocation is recent, and is of one of the four species of dislocation: then hurry to this, so that you wish to join it, and extend it inward and outward, and move it rightward and leftward: perhaps for it will return, and does not need other care.
But if it does not return this way, then it is necessary that you prepare a strong attendant, and let him extend his leg from the lower part: either with his hands or with a bandage which is tied above his leg above the knee; and another attendant extends his hand from above, so that he inserts his hands under his tibialis. Then let him tie with a soft bandage over the root of the thigh, and hold the end of the other bandage.
And let his extension be either from the front part of the groin to the part of the furcula, or from the back to the part of the dorsum.
And let the extension of all of them be as one, until the weak person is raised with his body from the ground, and remains hanging.
And this, indeed, species of extension is a common species of the four species.
Therefore if the dislocation returns with what we said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary for every species that I say about its proper cure.
In its reduction indeed when the dislocation is inward, it is necessary that the weak one lie supine upon his sound side. Then let him place a bandage upon the root of the thigh, in that which is between the head of the thigh and the place which is under the groin. Then extend the bandage upward from the groin to the higher part of the body, to the part of the collarbone.
Then let another attendant grasp his strong arms and reduce the thick place of the weak thigh, and extend it outward with a vehement extension. Now indeed it returns to its place.
And this kind is easier than the other kinds of treatment by which this limb is reduced.
But if it is excused over you and does not obey you to enter with this kind of treatment altogether: then it is necessary that two feet of the weak one be bound together with a strong, soft bandage upon the two heels and upon the two knees; and let the length of each be of the quantity of four fingers from its fellow: and let the weak leg be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
Then let the weak one be suspended upon the head of a beam which is in the house; and let its length from the ground be the quantity of two arm spans.
Then direct a strong youth to brace the head of the thigh; and let another youth be suspended with the weak one: and let another youth drive, bracing the thigh with strength, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
But in its reduction indeed when the dislocation is outward, it is necessary that the weak one lie upon a bench, according to what we have related about one who has a hump. And let a bandage be wound upon his weak leg properly and upon his chest.
Then let two pieces of wood be placed, one at his feet and the other at his head. Then a board should be placed in the middle of the footstool, fixed well; upon which wet cloths should be wrapped so as not to hurt the weak person; and let the board be between his thighs, so that he is not drawn down to the lower parts during extension.
Then let every attendant extend to his own part, and the physician equalize the reduction with his hand.
If therefore it yields to reversion, it will be good.
And if not, place upon the board itself, and press it equally as we said in the case of humpbackedness. However, it is necessary that the weak person lie on his sound side.
And when the dislocation is to the front, then it is necessary that the leg of the weak person be extended quickly; and this is according to the same account on the footstool; and let the physician place the palm of his right hand on the groin of the weak person. Then let him press it with his other hand, and with that pressure let him place it extended downward toward the knee.
And if the dislocation is to the rear: then it is not necessary that the weak person be extended downward, and let him be raised above the ground; nay, it is necessary that he be placed on something hard, as it must be done also when his ankle is dislocated outward, according to what we said about his lying on two ankles; and it is upon his face, and with extended ligaments; according to what we said recently.
And it is necessary that compression be administered with a board also upon the place to which the joint goes, when reduction is completed as it should be.
And the sign of its return is not hidden from you; and it is that you extend the two legs of the weak person; and when you see them equal, and the weak person draws up his leg and extends it without excuse: then know that the limb has now returned as it should; then join the two thighs together and put on a plaster and bind with bandages, that is, a wheel so that the ankle does not move to any of its parts; and let the weak person rest quietly for three days or four.
Then loosen the bandage and apply a plaster and compare the leg with the other; then if you see them equal in condition, then you will know that the dislocation is now firm; therefore discharge the weak one to walk.
And if you see anything of softening; then return and apply a plaster to it and bind it according to your first binding; and let it remain for three days as well.
Then loosen it and make him delay walking on both for several days until it is well strengthened.
Concerning the dislocation of the knee.
The knee is dislocated according to three ways. It is dislocated outwards, inwards, and downwards, that is to say, backwards.
And it does not dislocate forwards.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you order the weak person to apply his leg to his thigh. But if it does not adhere with the thigh; then you know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all ways of its dislocation is that you make the weak person sit upright so that he now extends his leg if he can upon it and adheres your back to his face; and place his foot between your feet.
Then make his knee adhere with your palms and put them straight between your fingers over his knee. Then apply with your palm the two sides of his knee with force. And let another attendant extend his foot until the knee returns to its place.
And the sign of restoration is that the leg adheres with the thigh easily, not laboriously.
Then plaster it and make the leg adhere with the thigh. Then bind it together with a splint for three days or four. Then loosen them.
And let the weak one not walk for several days, until he is healed.
But if its reduction is refused to you, then administer strong extension with ligaments, of which narration preceded in the treatment of a sprain, until it returns.
On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Calcaneus.
The calcaneus is sometimes removed with slight movement, and sometimes dislocated according to the complement. And its dislocation occurs, either inward or outward.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the calcaneus swollen, protruding to the side to which it has dislocated.
But the treatment of its removal is easy reduction: and it is to extend it with ease with the hands, and equalize it, until it returns.
But in the treatment of it when it dislocates according to the complement, it is necessary that you make the weak one sit upright: and let a strong attendant hold him very firmly from the posterior part of his back, in the middle of him.
Then hold you with your right hand his foot from its upper part, and with your left hand from the lower part of his foot in the place of the heel.
Then draw the foot toward you with your right hand. Then with the left twice.
Then extend with the left, and push the chest of the foot with the right toward the leg without labor.
Do that twice, as we have described.
Then push the chest of the foot toward the leg in the third time, and you draw the heel.
Therefore if it returns in one time or two according to this manner, and you see the foot equalized, it is good: and if not, then repeat the operation upon it: for it will return.
But if its reduction is prevented from you with what we have described: then make the weak one lie on his back on the ground, and fix a wedge firmly in the ground, so that it falls between his thighs: and you now wrapped a cloth over him, so that it does not injure the weak one.
Then let the assistant take hold of his thigh; afterwards let another assistant extend the foot, either with his hands or with a bandage which he binds above the ankle. Then let every assistant extend himself against the extension of his companion; and let a bolster stand between the two thighs of the sick man, holding him so that his body is not drawn down towards the extension.
Then let the physician equalize the dislocation with his hands, and let another assistant hold the sound leg downwards. For the dislocation returns with speed.
Therefore when the dislocation returns and it is shown to you that the health of its return has been established, then apply a plaster and bandage, and bind it firmly with bandages, and bind the foot with a bandage to the leg.
And it is necessary that you are careful or fearful of the nerves which are above the heel behind, so that the bandage is not tight upon them and injures them.
Then dismiss him for two days or three. If the bandage becomes loosened, tighten it; then untie it on the third or fourth day; and forbid the sick man from walking for forty days. But if he should try to walk before that time, there will be no safety lest the dislocation return upon him and become corrupted so that it does not receive a cure afterward.
But if a hot abscess should occur to him, then it is necessary that you administer it for the quieting of his ailment according to our previous narration in another place concerning its cure and an application, until it is removed.
Concerning the dislocation of the toes and their treatment.
It is necessary that what is dislocated from them be equalized with a little extension without labor; and indeed this is not difficult, but rather easy.
But if the dislocation is in some of the knuckles on the back of the foot, then it is necessary that the sick man place his foot upon a level spot of ground or upon a board; and he stands thus as though walking.
Then you stand and place your foot on that which protrudes from those articulations. Then press that with your foot with force until it returns and you see it now leveled and no longer appearing prominent in the place.
Then place under the belly of his foot a board which will receive the whole foot, to which there are two heads. Then bind it with a decent bandage for three days. Then unbind it and make him rest from walking for many days until it is tightened and secured from displacement.
Concerning the types of dislocations with wound or fracture.
When something of this kind occurs and you attempt its treatment and restoration, death often follows; and therefore it is not necessary that one presume upon the cure of such a thing unless he is prudent in the art from long practice, merciful, pious, slow, neither bold nor presumptuous; and so as to use in the beginning medicines which only allay hot abscesses; and dismiss the sick man to divine judgment. Unless you see or hope for safety from perdition with the gentleness of the illness, and in which there appears something of hope. Therefore attempt its reduction immediately at the beginning of the matter, before a hot abscess occurs.
If therefore the limb returns as we desire, then administer a regimen which allays abscesses; and care for the wound with what suits it from drying ointments.
But if the dislocation is with a fracture and separate bone splinters occur, then attempt their removal and do in that what we said in simple illnesses from what preceded in the places of those.
And be careful according to your ability and guard yourself from entering the way of fear; according to what my foregoing preaching has said to you.
For that is better for you with your Creator, and more lasting for your glory, and more saving for your body among them in your time.
