After I have completed for you, O sons, this book, which is the last of medical science with its complement, and I have reached the end in it from its expositions and its declarations, it seemed good to me to complete it for you with this Treatise which is a part of operation, that is surgery with the hand.
Since operation with the hand is prostrate in our region and time utterly private: until perhaps the knowledge of it perished, and the trace of it was cut off: and there remained nothing from it except small descriptions in the books of the ancients, which hands changed: and error and hesitation befell them, until its intentions were closed and its force lengthened: It seemed good to me to revive it with the arrangement of this Treatise in it according to the way of exposition, declaration, and abbreviation: and to come with the forms of instruments of the Cautery, and the rest of the operative instruments: with it being done from the addition of declaration, and its proper execution.
The cause however for which a good craftsman of it with his hand is not found in our time is: because the art of medicine is long, and it is necessary for its author to exercise himself before that in the science of anatomy as Galen narrated, until he knows the joints of the limbs, and their forms, and their conjunction and separation, and has knowledge of the bones, nerves, muscles, and their number, and their egress, and veins pulsatile and quiet, and places of their exit.
And for that Hippocrates said that a name with a name is much, and with work it is little, and especially in the art of the hand.
We however already said of that in the introduction to this book.
For he who is not knowing what we said of anatomy, is not purged, but rather falls into error by which men are killed: just as I have seen many of those who are formed from this science and boast themselves of it without knowledge, and without experiment.
Which is because I saw a foolish physician dissect a scrofulous abscess on a woman's neck and he cut into some arteries in her neck; therefore the woman bled until she fell dead between his hands.
And I saw another physician who presumed to extract a stone from a man who was advanced in age, and the stone was large. He therefore arrived at him and extracted it with a piece of the bladder. Therefore the man died on the third day.
And I indeed had already been summoned to extract it; and I saw from the size of the stone and the condition of the weak man that he would die.
And I saw another physician who was receiving a fee from a certain Duke in our land for medicine; and it happened that a black eunuch who was with him suffered a fracture in his leg near the heel; and the physician hurried with his ignorance and bound the fracture over the wound with lint and bandages, and a tight constriction, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
Then he discharged him according to his wishes. Afterwards he dismissed him after several days and ordered him not to loosen the bandage; and it remained so until his leg and foot became abscessed and reached destruction.
I was therefore summoned to him; and I hurried to loosen the bandage; and there followed quietude, and he escaped from his pains.
However the corruption had already been confirmed in the limb and I was not able to restrain it.
Put therefore the corruption ceased to spread in the limb until it died.
And I saw another physician who perforated a cancerous abscess; and it became ulcerated afterwards until the malice of it was magnified with its master.
Which is because when cancer is pure from melancholic humor then it is not necessary to approach it with iron at all unless it is in a limb which can tolerate it so that the whole of it may be cut off.
And for that reason, O Sons, it is necessary for you to know that the operation with the hand is divided into two divisions: namely, the operation which is associated with health; and the operation with which there is danger in many conditions.
And I have already roused in every place of this book where the operation comes which is fraught with terror and fear.
Therefore it is necessary for you to be cautious about that and divide it so that foolish people do not find a way to speak and dishonor.
Therefore accept the measure with solicitude and protection, and your infirm patients with ease and firmness, and use the better way leading by God's grace to salvation and praiseworthy succession; and dismiss terrible ailments of difficult healing; and lift up your souls from that which makes you fear, so that hesitation may enter upon you in your faith and well-being.
For it is more enduring for your glory, and more sublime in this world, and lastly for your quantities.
For Galen has already said in some of his admonitions. Do not treat a bad ailment lest you be called a bad doctor.
But I have now divided this treatise according to three chapters.
Chapter One.
On cautery with fire, and cautery with sharp medicine, chaptered and ordered from the head to the feet, and forms of instruments and tools for cautery; and everything necessary in the operation.
Chapter Two.
On incision and perforation, phlebotomy and venesections, and wounds: and the extraction of arrows, and things similar to that; and wholly chaptered, ordered according to the forms of instruments.
Chapter Three.
On restoration, and dislocation, and the treatment of torsion, and things similar to that; chaptered, ordered from the head to the feet, and according to the forms of instruments.
But before I recall the operations with it, it is necessary to say what its qualities of benefits and harms are, and in which complexion it is exhibited.
Therefore I say that speech concerning the quality of cautery's benefit and its harm is a lengthy and subtle science and hidden secret.
Indeed, many wise men have spoken on this matter and disagreed; and it suffices me to speak a little from their words, fearing delay.
Therefore I say that cautery is applied universally to every complexion which has matter and is without matter, except for two complexions, which are a hot complexion without matter and a dry complexion without matter.
However in the hot and dry complexion with matter they disagreed. For some said that cautery is beneficial in it. And others said the opposite of that, namely that cautery is not suitable in illness which is from heat and dryness; because the nature of fire is heat; and it is unsuitable for something hot and dry to heal a hot and dry illness.
And he who says the opposite of that said: that benefit is done through cautery in every hot and dry illness which occurs in the bodies of men; because when you compare the body of a man and its humidities to the complexion of fire, you find the body of a man cold.
And I indeed say through his speech: because experience has already shown me that many times.
However it is not necessary for that to come about unless one who has already been proven and practiced in the ultimate exercise of cautery, and has known the diversity of complexions of men, and the disposition of illnesses within themselves, and their causes, and their accidents, and the space of time of them.
But there is no fear for you from the remaining complexions; and especially in cold and moist illnesses. For all physicians have now agreed upon them, and they did not disagree about cautery for them.
And know, sons, that from the secret of treatment by cautery with fire, and its goodness over cautery with a burning medicine, is because fire is simple, whose action does not reach except to the member that you are cauterizing; and it does not harm another joined member, except for slight harm.
But the action of burning medicine reaches that which extends from the members; and perhaps it causes illness of difficult healing to occur in the member, and perhaps it kills it.
But fire, on account of its subtlety and goodness of its substance, does not do that unless it overflows.
Indeed it has now become clear to us through experimentation, because of the length of service and study with the art, and standing upon the truth of things; and on account of that I excuse myself from the length of speech.
And if it were not because it is not permitted for this book of mine to bring to you the hidden secret in fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies in its expulsion, by which it expels illnesses through philosophical discourse demonstrated, which would agree with your minds.
And know, sons, that they themselves disagree on the time in which it is fitting to perform cautery, and they establish a better time for truth.
And I say that cautery is fitting at all times; because the harm that happens because of time is submerged in the benefit, which is attracted with cautery. And especially if the cautery is for pains from necessary pains, strong, urgent, which do not tolerate delay; because it is feared from them that a greater evil may happen, than a small harm entering because of time.
And let it not enter your minds, O sons, that which the common and foolish physicians do not esteem, namely that to the disease which is healed by cautery, there is not always a return; they suppose this consequence, but the matter is not as they think, because cautery is nothing but medicine applied in a place, which alters the complexion and dries up the humidities which are the causes of pain.
However, cautery surpasses medicine by the swiftness of its healing, and the power of its operation, and the vehemence of its dominion; and it is possible that the illness may return at some hour according to the complexion of the sick person, and the location of his illness, and its power: and that which is prepared in his body from an aggregation of superfluities therein, and which reaches him in its acquisition from foods, and things like them from causes, unless it becomes an illness in which cautery is administered.
Illness subtle in a limb of few superfluities and humidities, such as cautery of the tooth on account of pain and similar things to it, for it is possible that the pain will not return therein. But this happens rarely.
But truly the common saying again that cautery is the last of medicine is a right statement; not to what they intend therein, for they believe that there is no cure which agrees with medicine nor with another after the setting of the cautery.
The matter is on the contrary to that, and the intention that cautery is the last of medicine is not except when we administer modes of cure in some illnesses, and those medicines do not agree; then afterwards we administer cautery at the end of the matter, and it agrees; then from this it falls that cautery is the last of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and many foolish physicians understand.
The ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except on account of the equality of gold and the exaltation of its substance; and they said that it does not make pus in the place of the cautery. But that is not absolutely true: for I myself have already proven it, and found that it does not do that in some bodies without others.
And a cautery with it is good, and better than with iron, as they said. However, when you make a cautery fire out of gold, it is not declared to you when it is ignited according to the amount you wish, because of the redness of the gold; and when cold rushes to it, and if you add fire on top of it, it melts in the fire, and turns into sheets.
Therefore the craftsman falls from it into occupation; and because of that a cautery with iron is made among us quicker and closer, out of straightness for the operation.
And I myself have now arranged this chapter on cautery, according to chapters; and I have arranged those things from the head down to the feet: so that it may relieve one seeking that which he wants from it.
Chapter II.
This cauterization applies to the dominion of humidity and coldness over the brain: which are two causes of headaches, and a multitude of flows of humors from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and a multitude of sleep, and toothache, and throat pain; and universally all illnesses, which happen from coldness, such as paralysis, and headaches, epilepsy, and apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The method of cauterization is that you should advise the sick person: that he evacuate in the first place with medicinal purgatives cleansing the head for three nights, or four, according to what the strength of the sick person requires, and his age, and his habit.
Then advise him that he make his head bare with a razor. Then have him sit between your hands in a square way, so that he has already placed his hands upon his chest.
Then place the root of your palm upon the root of his nose between his eyes. Therefore wherever your middle finger shall arrive, mark that spot with a cautery.
Then a cautery with olive oil: which has this shape.
Then place it upon the spot marked with the cautery, with a downward motion, whereby your hand shall be gradually constricted, and you shall revolve it. Then quickly lift your hand and look at the spot.
And if you see that a quantity equal to the head of an awl or the size of rue has already been exposed from the bone, then lift your hand. And if not, repeat your hand with the same iron or with another if it becomes cold, until you see the bones which I told you.
Then take some salt and dissolve it in water, and imbibe the cotton in it, and place it upon the spot, and leave it for three days.
Then place cotton imbued with butter upon it, and leave it upon the spot until the burn is destroyed. Then care for it with tetrapharmakon ointment until it heals.
Now they have said that the more a wound remains open, the more pus it emits, therefore it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them have said that the skin should be cauterized down to the bone, and the cautery should be held until something of the thickness of bone is scorched.
Then after that which has been scorched is scraped from the bone, it shall then be cared for.
And others say that it is necessary with the cautery to reach the very end until it imprints a shape upon the bone so that the bone falls, which is done like the shape of a kirate: or an instrument which women put in with a small alphabet infused; and they consider that vapors of the head are exhaled from this place, and the wound is left open for a long time.
Then it should be cared for until it becomes consolidated.
But these two kinds of cautery do not seem to me to be anything other than according to the way of fear in certain people.
And it is better for me to dismiss him, with his health.
For the head is weakened by the breaking of its natural continuity, as we have testified in other members; and especially when the head of a weak and frail person is infirm; and indeed the first kind of cautery is safer and better for me, and I use it; therefore operate with it in safety.
Chapter III.
When a chronic pain occurs throughout the whole head and it is prolonged in a weak person, and they use leeches, cupping glasses, purgatives, oils, and poultices. And especially if it has already been cauterized with one cautery, which we have described, and nothing is conferred upon him from those things, then consider. For if the head of a weak person is strong by nature and is not frail, and it finds intense cold, then cauterize with another cautery under that one a little. Then cauterize him over the whole horn of his head with a cautery, so that it does not go through the skin, and uncover a quantity from the bone as we have described. And cauterize him with one cautery on the back of his head, in a place called the vas; and it is the place where windy currents are placed; and elevate your hand in this, and do not uncover the bone. For the weak person finds on account of that intense pain, and different from the pain of all the other head cauteries.
And I will say this cautery in its place; and it is necessary that it be a cautery with which the horns of the head are cauterized, and the back of his head with a more subtle cautery than that with which the middle of the head is cauterized.
Chapter IV.
When pain and swelling occur in a part of the head, or the pain extends as far as the eye, and the head is cleansed with purifying medicines, and the remaining treatment, which I have mentioned in the divisions of diseases, is administered, and that does not bring it all together: then cauterization is applied in this case according to two methods: either cauterization with a sharp burning medicinal agent; or with iron.
Cauterization, however, with a sharp burning medicinal agent is done as follows: you take one clove of garlic, and peel it, and cut off its ends from both sides. Then split the area of pain at a time when bloodletting is wide, until a place under the skin is made where the clove is gripped.
Therefore insert it just under the skin until it is concealed; then bind over it with a bandage of decent constriction and leave it for fifteen hours; then loosen it and remove the garlic, and let the wound rest for two or three days; afterwards apply a poultice soaked in butter over it until the place produces pus; then treat it with ointment until it heals.
And if you wish to do this with some burning medicines, which I have written about in the twelfth treatise, On Burning Medicines.
Cauterization of it with iron, however, is done in this way. Heat a cautery, which has this shape.
And it is called a Clavis because the shape of its head is like the shape of a key, in which there is a certain curve, and in the middle of it there is a small prominence.
Then place it upon the spot and hold your hand steady; and rotate the iron gradually with speed; and let the quantity that is cauterized be half the thickness of the skin. And raise your hand so that the artery below is not injured and blood flow occurs.
Then soak a swab in salt water and place it on the spot and leave it for three days; then put the swab with butter; afterwards treat with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize this hemicranium with the second blade end of the cautery. And beware of cutting an artery in this hemicranium, not an old one properly.
On the way of cauterizing an old hemicranium.
When you treat a hemicranium with what we said from the preceding treatment and what we said in the divisions of diseases, and the treatment does not take effect; and you see from the ailment that it is not sufficient for it what we said from the first cautery with medicine, or with fire cautery, then it is necessary to ignite the knife cautery until it whitens after you make a line on the place of pain, whose length is half a finger, or something like that; and place your hand with one finger, and squeeze it until you hit the artery and reach the mouth.
However it is necessary for you to be careful of the continuation of the jawbone which moves at mastication so that the side or the nerve which moves it is not injured, from which a spasm may occur.
And be careful and cautious about the flow of blood from the artery which has been cut. For there is fear in its cutting off, and especially for him who does not know what he is doing, and is not studious nor experienced; and he abandons the operation with it at first.
And I will come with a reminder of managing the flow of blood occurring from an artery according to its own way and in its place in this book.
If you see from the illness that this cautery is not enough for it, and you see a weak body tolerating the cautery in the middle of the head as we have described, care for the wound until it heals.
And if you wish, apply the cautery that we said in the chapter on extraction of an artery with a cautery having two knives. For this cauterization is better and more effective.
On the method of cauterizing for ear pain.
When ear pain occurs from cold and is treated with solutions and the remaining treatment as we said in the division, and the pain does not go away, then apply heat with a cautery; and it is that which is called a Point, its shape is this.
Then make points with it after igniting it around the entire ear, as it revolves: or around both if there is pain in both at the same time. And hold the cautery away from the root of the ear a little after you have marked the places with an ointment: and let the quantity of the cautery be ten points in each ear, and like that.
Then care for the places until they heal.
On the method of cauterizing for torture.
Chapter Seven.
The torture that is treated with cautery is not except for species that occur from phlegm, according to what we said in the divisions of diseases.
And avoid cautery for species that occurs from dryness and nerve spasm.
When you treat this species of torture with rue, purges and gargles, and your treatment does not work, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the weak person in three places: one at the root of the ear, and a second a little below its temple, and a third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery opposite the weak part. For softening does not happen except in the part which appears healthy.
And the form of the cautery is that you cauterize with the cautery itself directly at the upper end of the ear under the horn of the head a little; and again at another time; the length of which should be according to the length of the thumb. And place your hand with the cautery until half the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a kind of knife, whose form has been mentioned; however it is not thinner by a little, as you see; and it must be that the knife in it has a superfluous thickness a little.
Then treat the places with what precedes until they are healed.
On the method of cauterizing in old apoplexy.
When apoplexy becomes old, and you treat it with what we have said, and your medication does not work, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries over all the horn of his head, and one cautery in the middle of the head, as we have said, and one cautery on the back of the head, according to what precedes; and let the method of cautery be according to what precedes.
Also, cauterize with a cautery over the mouth of the stomach; and this is the last resort.
Then treat it with what precedes.
Chapter Nine.
It is necessary that first, the sick person be given a large dose of hyssop in their drink, and pills to cleanse the brain.
Then shave the head of the sick person completely and place on the back of their head a plaster made of synaph, as described in the treatise on plasters; and apply it several times.
For indeed this is the method of cautery, and do that in the same order as I said there.
Therefore if it heals by that, it is good. If not, then make for him three cauteries on the back of his head, which are descending from the top of the head down to the lower part of the eye; and put a finger's breadth between each cautery.
Then take care of the cautery as with the one that preceded it.
But if you wish an addition, and he is weak enough to tolerate it, then make for him a cautery in the middle. But if you wish an addition, then cauterize it above the two horns.
Then take care of it until it heals, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form that has been given.
On the method of cauterizing in paralysis, and softening.
Chapter Ten.
It is necessary that you proceed in the purification of the head with lye and with what we have said.
Then shave the head of the sick person; afterwards cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head, and a cautery on each horn of the head, and a cautery on the back of it, and three on the vertebrae of the neck.
But if you are lacking in the illness softening of the body with those and he is weak enough to tolerate it, and the illness is strong; then cauterize him with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and the last one with a cautery, until it burns out most of its skin, and raise your hand. Then take care of it until it heals; and thus let the cautery be olive-shaped.
On the method of cautery in epilepsy.
An epileptic person is not cauterized unless his epilepsy is from phlegm.
Therefore it is necessary that you cleanse his brain first with vinegar, and with the remaining treatment which we said in the division: when the patient is large, or he can tolerate the reception of medicines.
But if he is a child who cannot tolerate medicines, then a gargle and cleansing chews are administered for the brain, before that for many days with improvement of foods.
Then shave his head, afterwards cauterize it with one cautery in the middle of the head, according to what preceded in the manner; and with another cautery on the back of his head, and with a cautery over every horn of his own head. But if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize him with the cauteries which I said in those having paralysis, and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck, and vertebrae of the back; and let the cautery be olive-oil according to the manner which preceded.
But if the patient is a child, then place a subtle cautery, according to this manner.
Concerning the manner of cauterizing in melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize him with the cauteries which we said in those having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is a superfluity inclined toward melancholy and the body of the sick person is damp, then give him a drink that will cleanse his brain, according to what preceded in the division; then shave the head of the sick person, and afterwards make a decent headband from linen, like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the head; and let the patient sitting straight be held on all sides.
Then present a liniment. And it is more fitting from old butter. And heat it over fire with a tempered heat measurement which the finger can tolerate when inserted into it. Then evacuate it in the middle of its head in a circle, and leave it until it becomes cold.
Do that to the weak one once a week, with the rest of its good regimen, until it is healed.
Or if you wish, cauterize it by making many small punctures in it, except for what you hold with the cautery: let there be a smell.
For this kind of cautery moistens the brain with quality.
Then put a swab soaked in butter or chicken fat on top of it.
On the way of cauterizing in descending water to the eye.
Chapter Thirteen.
When the beginning of water is declared to you in the eye through the signs that I mentioned in the division, then begin and drink the weak one, with what cleanses its head.
And keep it from all moisture, and make it sit in a bath, fasting for several days.
Then instruct him to shave his head, and cauterize it in the middle of his head. Then cauterize it above the two temples with two cauteries, if there is a beginning of descending water in both eyes at the same time: or from one side, if there is a beginning of water in one eye: and cut off with the cautery all the veins and arteries that are under the skin: and let the cautery be long in the breadth of the temples: and beware of the flow of blood.
For if you see anything coming from it, then cut it off immediately with whatever medicine is possible: and I will come with the wisdom that is in the extraction of arteries, and cutting them off, and caution against the flow of blood.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck, under the two bones, with two cauteries lastly produced.
On the way of cauterizing in old tears.
When tears from the eyes are old, persistent, and are upon the veins and arteries which are on the outer part of the head openly, it is verified that this is from cold, phlegmatic superfluities; then cauterize with the same cautery as I have described in the beginning for descending water, a cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries above the two temples, and two cauteries on the neck under the two bones. And if it does not yield with addition, then cauterize it on every side cautiously near the eye, above the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Concerning the way of cauterizing for a foul smell of the nose.
When you treat it with what we said in the division, and the treatment does not succeed, then hurry and give in a drink three nights a decoction of lentils: then shave its head, and cauterize it with a medium cautery, with an olive-wood cautery. Then cauterize it with a small clove-wood cautery, two cauteries above the two eyebrows a little under the hairs.
And be careful of the artery so that you do not strike it.
And this is the shape of a clove-wood cautery.
Concerning the way of cauterizing for softening of an eyelid.
When an eyelid of the eye softens from illness or humidity, then cauterize the eyelid with one cautery, with this moon-shaped cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize it above the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries on every side, and they will be lengthened from the two temples: and let the length of the whole cautery be according to the lengths of the eyebrow: and do not end your hand with the cautery, rather according to the amount that the third eyelid is burnt.
On the way of cauterizing an eyelid when hairs turn inwards and sting the eye.
A cautery is of two types: either a cautery with fire, or a cautery with a burning medicine.
However, in a cautery with fire, advise the patient beforehand to let go of their hairs, if they are among those who remove them, until they grow long and equal. But if they sting him at their origin, then bind his eyes with a strip so that they do not move until they are born.
When they are therefore born and equal, then place the patient's head in your lap; then mark over the eyelid of their eyes with a cautery stick, a mark that is according to the shape of a myrtle leaf; and let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs.
Then place a swab dipped in albumin or psyllium mucilage over the eye.
Then apply the cautery with fire, which has this form.
Then cauterize over the shape that you marked gradually in many passes until the surface of the skin, which is like the shape of a myrtle leaf, is entirely burned properly.
And the sign of the health of your work is: that if you see the eyelid of the eye already contract and the hairs rise at the puncture of the eye.
Therefore raise your hand then and let him go for three days.
Then place a swab with butter on it until the scab is eradicated. Then care for him with ointment until he heals.
If any hair should return after an hour, and the eyelid becomes softened, then repeat the cautery on that place as you did first.
But if the hairs are below: then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural place; and equalize it so that the hairs do not prick the eye.
It is as if you instruct the sick person to let go of the hairs until they are prolonged and equalized. Make from paper or cloth the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Then take from known soap, and from quicklime not soaked one ounce each or thereabouts; then grind them together with good friction, and do it quickly so that it does not cool down. Then from the pan put it upon the paper which you made like the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it upon the eyelid of one or both eyes. And place under the eye a cloth soaked in albuminous matter; and let the head of the sick person be in your lap.
And place your index finger upon the medicine, and press it for a short time. And you will move it whenever the sick person feels the bite of the medicine; because he finds its bite like fire.
Therefore while this continues that he finds the bite, then let go of the medicine and move it with your finger. When therefore the biting ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And consider then if you see the eyelid rise as it rises in contraction with fire or with incision, it is good; and if not, then repeat upon it from the medicine upon the place where the medicine does not imprint and does not stain until your operation equals and the eye contracts.
Then place upon it a cloth with butter until the skin of the burn is removed. Then care for it with diaphinicon ointment or another until it heals.
And it is necessary for you during surgery to keep the last precaution so that something from the medicine does not fall into the eye.
But if the eyelid softens after a few days and something from the hairs fights into the eye, then repeat the medicine upon that place which softens from the eyelid itself, just as you did at first. Then care for it until it heals.
And this is the form of a myrtle leaf.
And know that the eyes of men are diversified in size and equality. Therefore let your consideration be according to that, and the way of straightness is not hidden from him who has a desire for this art.
Concerning the method of cauterizing a lacrimal fistula.
When you treat a fistula, as we said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary for you to cauterize it according to this method.
Instruct the sick person to place his head on your lap, and let a minister hold his head between his hands so that it does not move nor shake with his head.
Then place a cotton swab infused in egg white or in psyllium mucilage upon his eye; then with fire a cautery, the shape of which is this.
Let it be concave, like the shape of a vulture's feather quill from one end, with which the cautery is made; and if you wish it to penetrate to the other end, and if you wish it upward then try this way.
But truly this concave shape is better for your purpose.
Then press the fistula, if it is open, and extract the pus from it, and dry it; and if it is not open then open it and extract its pus.
Then place upon it the cautery which has been ignited very hot.
Hold your hand with it for a short time near the cautery by the eye, toward the side of the nose, so that your hand does not wander, or the weak one is agitated; and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
So if you reach at the beginning of your cautery up to the mouth, it will be well. And if not: then repeat the cautery once, or twice, if necessary with it; and let it go for three days.
Then put a poultice with butter, and care for it with a drying ointment until it heals.
And if forty days pass it and it does not heal: then put an acute corrosive medicine on it until the mouth is uncovered; and scrape it according to what comes in its chapter.
And there is another way of cautery for fistula, which some first said. Direct it to the place of the fistula and find it; then put a thin cautery into the fissure, that is, a thin cannula, whose form is this. And pour into it a quantity of a drachma of melted lead and hold your hand with the cannula in good retention, and do not move the weak one at all so that the molten lead does not run or reach its eye.
And it is necessary to put a poultice soaked in albumin, or in water on the eye of the weak one.
For lead burns the place of the fistula and heals it with a wonderful healing.
If the fistula is healed with what we said from cautery, and care, it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to administer the nasal foramen and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose according to what will come in its own place.
On the way of cauterizing in lip fissures.
Very often fissures occur in the lip which are called pili, and especially in the lips of children.
Therefore when you treat these fissures, as we said in the division of diseases, and treatment is ineffective, then apply a small knife cautery fire in this manner.
And let its concavity be according to the subtlety of the knife.
Then immediately place the ignited cautery upon the fissures themselves until the cautery reaches the depth of the fissures.
Then treat it with cerate until it heals.
Concerning the method of cauterizing a fistula of the mouth.
When an abscess occurs at the root of the gum or in the palate or in the roots of teeth, then it makes pus and bursts; afterwards it becomes chronic, and pus runs from it, and a fistula forms: then treat it, and if treatment is ineffective, you must apply a cautery fire according to the size that fits into the fistula. Then insert the ignited iron into the fistula opening and hold your hand steady until the ignited iron reaches its depth and end; do this once or twice.
Then treat it afterwards as we said about treatment until it is healed.
Therefore if the discharge of blood is cut off and it heals, it will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to open the area and remove the corrupt bone according to what comes in its chapter.
Concerning the method of cauterizing the gums and softened teeth.
When the gum softens because of moisture and teeth loosen, and you treat it with medication, and treatment is ineffective; then place the head of the infirm person in your lap.
Then a cautery by fire, of which the shape will come after this, so that you place the Cannula upon the tooth: and introduce into it the ignited Cautery quickly: and hold your hand for a short time, until the weak one feels the heat of the fire has now reached the root of the tooth.
Then raise your hand: then repeat the Cautery several times, according as you wish.
Then let the weak one fill his mouth with salt water, and hold it for one hour: and spit it out.
For the tooth loosened is made firm, and the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupted moisture is dried.
Concerning the way of cauterizing in toothache.
When toothache is because of coldness, or there is cold in it itself, or a worm, and healing does not come with medicine: then the Cautery is in itself according to two ways: either a Cautery with butter; or a Cautery with fire.
But the Cautery of it with butter is, that you take vaccinum butter, and boil it in an iron spoon, or in a brazier. Then take a cotton swab, and wrap it upon the extremity of the tentacle. Then immerse it in the boiled butter: and place it upon the aching tooth quickly, and hold it until it becomes cold: then repeat it several times, until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, immerse wool, or cotton in cold butter, and place it upon the aching tooth: and put ignited iron upon it, until the fire reaches the depth of the cavity of the tooth.
But the cauterization of it with fire is, that you direct to an air cannula, or an iron cannula. And let there be something of thickness in its body, so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the weak one.
Then a cautery by fire, whose shape will come, and place it upon that tooth, and hold your hand until the cautery becomes cold.
Do that several times, for the pain will be removed, either on the same day or another day.
And it is necessary in the impression of that cautery, that the weak person fill his mouth with good butter, and hold it for an hour; then he spits it out.
And this is the form of the cautery.
Cauterize with whichever extremity you wish according to what is possible; and this is the form of the cannula.
On the manner of cauterizing in hernias.
When hernias are from phlegm, and from cold humors, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, and you wish for their quick digestion; then a concave cautery by fire, whose form is this.
Having two open extremities, so that the smoke may exit at the cautery from one extremity; and place it ignited upon the hernia once, and a second time, if needed by it, until it reaches the depth of the hernia.
Which if the hernia is small; then place the cautery according to the amount of the hernia.
Then leave it for three days, and place upon it cotton infused in butter until what the fire burned is removed.
Then care for it with tooth ointment until the shape of the cannula is healed.
On the manner of cauterizing in hoarseness of voice and constriction of breath.
When humors overcome the canals of the lungs, and especially when it is with coldness of complexion, then it is necessary that the weak person be first evacuated with dissolving medicines.
Then cauterize it at night at the root of the throat in a depressed place; and be careful not to reach the throat with the cautery, nor into the skin, except a little bit of it.
Then cauterize it with another cautery at the junction of the neck in the last vertebra, ending it; and let the cautery be sharp according to the previous way.
Then treat it with what preceded until it is healed.
On the way of cauterizing in illnesses of the lung and cough.
When the cough and lung ailment are from cold humors, and the weak person does not have a fever, nor phthisis, and the ailment is old: then cauterize him with two cauteries above the collarbone in depressed, gentle, empty places. And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two nipples; and let the cautery be cannula-shaped according to the form that preceded.
And if you wish your cauterization to be by puncturing with a cautery, which is called a Punctum, whose shape preceded in the puncturing of ear pain: and let the punctures be from thirty punctures up to almost others.
Then treat him with what preceded until he is healed.
And now let the cautery have three branches according to this form. Therefore the cauterization is relieved when you do it with that juice and three cauteries together.
Chapter Twenty-Seven.
When the head of the humerus is dislocated because of humors, and it is not fixed within an hour of its return from its dislocation until it becomes accustomed to returning, then it is dislocated by a slight movement which happens as we have already testified: then it is necessary that you first reduce the dislocation. Then the weak person is laid on his back, or on his sound side. Then lift the skin which is inside the scrotum upwards with the fingers of your left hand: and if the joint dislocates inwards.
Then, having a burning cautery, apply two true points. Whose shape is this.
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side, and the figure of the cautery will come with four cauteries.
And sometimes the cautery is done with a cautery having three points, so that the figure of the cautery then becomes six points: and the points are tested according to subtlety.
And this is the shape of a cautery having three points.
And sometimes one more is added in this way, so there are eight cauteries.
Then place bruised leeks with salt on the cautery. Then make the weak person adhere to tranquility so that the limb does not move for a while until it is strengthened.
And if the dislocation is upwards, and this rarely happens, then cauterize it yourself above the shoulder with a clavicle cautery, or by puncturing with many cauteries.
For the joint is strengthened and moisture is removed: and the weak person is healed.
Concerning the method of cauterizing the stomach.
When cold and much moisture happen in the stomach until they draw it away from its own complexion, and catarrhs are multiplied to it, and there are frequent modes of treatment, and it does not help: then it is necessary for the weak person to be laid on his back, and to extend his legs and arms. Then cauterize with three cauteries, the cautery under the pectoral spoon the size of one finger with a clavicle cautery, and two cauteries below on both sides of one cautery, until the figure of the cauteries becomes triangular. And lengthen between each so they do not join together when they form pus.
And let the depth of the cautery be the quantity of two-thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And let the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without addition: and if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and let the cautery with which this cautery is made be one according to the shape of a circle according to this form.
And the stomach is cauterized by pricking it for he who is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you make a sign upon the stomach a prick according to the quantity which you wish with an encaustic; then cauterize it itself with a point cautery; then care for it with the care which preceded until it is healed.
On the way of cauterizing a cold epar.
When it happens in the epar that pain arises from coldness and humidity, or from thick windiness, until superfluous egresses from its natural complexion, and the infirm is cured with that which we have said, and does not make progress in it: then it is necessary that the infirm lies on his back upon his neck, and makes three cauteries with an encaustic according to this figure, and the same quantity upon the epar below the hypochondria where the elbow of a man reaches; and let the space which is between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger: and let the cautery be straight according to the length of the body: and do not press your hand hard with the cautery.
And let the quantity of that which is burned from the thickness of the skin be the quantity of half of it not added to; and let the infirm stand upon his own feet.
But if he is not standing, then let him lie down who has already extended his legs and raised his arms.
This is the form of a cautery.
And it is indeed possible for you, to cauterize with this cautery using a knife cautery, when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
And beware that you do not proceed too far in cauterization, and the thickness of all the skin is hardened, wherefore the whole body is hardened, and it reaches to the intestines: for the skin there is delicate, therefore know this.
On the Method of Cauterizing Liver Abscesses.
When it happens that you wish to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver, or in its tunic: then if it is in the flesh of the liver, a weak pain and gravity without sharpness invade; and if it is in the tunic of the liver, with the pain there is vehement sharpness; and you see now that the treatment has wearied its physicians.
Therefore it is necessary that the weak person lie down on his neck. Then mark the location of the abscess with a hot iron; then ignite the cautery which resembles a ray. And this is its form. And cauterize with this cautery one time, until the whole skin is burned and reaches the siphac, until all the pus comes out; then treat it with treatment for ulcers, until it heals.
And it is not necessary that this species of cautery be used, except by one whose study in the art of medicine is prolonged; and through whose hands these illnesses run frequently with experiment: then let him dare to perform this kind of operation.
But truly I consider it better to leave it alone.
On the Method of Cauterizing in Pleuresy.
The ancients said that a cautery with the roots of aristolochia should be applied to cold pleuresy in this way. Take a single long root from the dried roots of aristolochia, which is found among them and is as thick as a finger. Then immerse it in oil and set it alight with fire. Then cauterize with a single cautery between the extension of the collarbone and the neck, and with two small cauteries under the jawbone on slight slopes towards the part that is below the beard.
And with two cauteries also between the fifth and sixth ribs on slight slopes towards the back; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach. And with three cauteries from the back: one between the two shoulder blades; and two cauteries from the two sides of the chest, below the cautery that is between the two shoulder blades.
And it is not necessary to press your hand with the cautery, rather let it be held openly on the skin smelling.
And some ancients have said that there are men who use a cautery made of iron similar to a spoke; they ignite it and insert it between the ribs until they reach the abscess with it, and pus flows out; as we said in the case of a liver abscess.
But there is danger in this perforation with a cautery because either the weak person dies immediately or a fistula forms in the place, which has no cure.
On the Method of Cauterizing the Spleen Chapter Thirty-Two.
When you treat spleen disease as we said in the treatment in the division of diseases, and your treatment does not work, then a cautery is used according to three methods, all of which are correct.
One of them is to make three or four cauteries in a line along the length of the spleen according to the figure of the liver cauteries, whose figure precedes this one.
And let there be between every cautery a quantity of the thickness of a finger, or more or less.
And let the manner of the cautery, which we said in the cautery of the liver, be equally so.
And do not press your hand with the cautery: and let the patient lie on his back.
And another method of cauterization is: to have the cautery with two points of fire, as we said in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder; and raise the skin which is in the direction of the spleen, where the left elbow of the patient reaches; and let your elevation be such that you raise the skin according to the width of the body, so that the cauteries may fall according to the length of the body.
Then insert the two burning points deeply until you penetrate the skin on the other side; then withdraw the cautery; thus there will be four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with another cautery having three points.
Then take care that the cautery after you have let it discharge pus for many days; for it is more convergent than any other which has preceded from healing.
On the Method of Cauterizing in Dropsy.
A cautery does not fall in dropsy, except on the legs properly.
When you treat a dropsy patient with the methods of treatment which we said in the division, and the treatment does not converge, then it is necessary that you cauterize him with four cauteries around the navel, and one cautery on the stomach, and another on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two cauteries behind the back between the vertebrae, and one in the direction of the chest, and another in the direction of the stomach; and let the quantity of the depth of the cautery be near the thickness of the skin.
Then leave the cautery open so that it discharges pus for a long time.
And do not withdraw the weak from treatment after cautery with him, for it is necessary that two intentions be joined to him, and healing will hasten to him with the help of God.
The form of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be a claw, as its shape preceded; and that with which the back is cauterized, should be olive-shaped, according to its preceding form.
On the method of cauterizing feet and legs.
When they swell up with dropsy and are filled with clear water, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot in the nocrati region, which is between the auricular and annular regions; and raise your hand with the cautery, and do not twist it; then raise your hand and do not rub it at all.
For the clear water will redden, and the cautery should be of this form.
Then make two cauteries on both legs, and let the cautery be made with the sharp end of the cautery; and let the cautery be made according to the length of the leg, one below the knee, and the other below it, around the middle of the leg; and make two cauteries on each thigh. Leave the cautery open without treatment for a long time so that some water reddens from it; then treat it with the rest that we have said.
On the method of cauterizing in ventral hernia.
Chapter XXXV.
When there is a ventral hernia from cold and humidity, until the retentive and digestive powers which are in the stomach and intestines weaken, and it is treated with methods of treatment and does not heal; and you see the weak patient tolerating cautery of abundant power, then cauterize him with a large cautery on his stomach, as previously mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach with a circular cautery, and four small cauteries around the navel with a claw-shaped small cautery; and a large cautery above the groin above the pubic bone, or two cauteries.
And if you see excessive moistures, and a weak patient enduring it, then cauterize it with a cautery over the comb, and with a cautery over the whole groin; and perhaps you will add two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one.
For it is a beneficial treatment, whose advantage does not stray.
Concerning the manner of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Chapter Thirty-Six.
When there are many old hemorrhoids in the anus, or one, and they are from thick, cold humors, or corrupted humidities, and they are cured with what we said in the division, and the treatment does not take effect: then cauterize with three cauteries over the lower spinal bone of the back under the almeidati a little triangularly, and with a cautery under the navel as if with two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is chilled and his food is not digested, and you see his face swelling, then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cautery, according to what preceded; and with a cautery over his liver, and another over his spleen, with a clauile cautery: and let the cautery be open for some time; then treat him until he is healed.
Chapter Thirty-Seven.
When you excise atheromas, then heat a cautery that resembles a rod. Then introduce the heated one into the excised atheroma; and guide your hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows: do this once, or twice.
If therefore there are many atheromas, then cauterize each one with a cautery according to what we have described. Then treat them with what is beneficial for them from ointments, until they are healed.
And if you cauterize it with a large cautery over the ligature, it is most effective for healing.
On the Method of Cauterizing a Fistula in Ano.
Chapter XXXVIII.
When the sick person does not submit to incision and the work which we have described in its place, and is terrified of it, perhaps he may be healed with a cautery.
Therefore, when it happens to someone that a fistula exists, and it is longstanding, pus flows from it, and corrupt humors. It is therefore more fitting that you should examine it with a subtle probe. Then ascertain the depth of it with the probe.
Then ignite a cautery, which is similar to a rod. Then insert the ignited [cautery] into the fistula itself and mark the quantity in which it entered.
And repeat the cautery upon it until all those corrupt bodies are burned, once, or twice, or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
And be careful of burning a nerve, if it is there, or a large vein; or if the fistula leads to the body of the bladder, or to the body of the intestine, then be careful of all these places.
And do not do this unless when the fistula is in a fleshy place, and you think that it is not penetrating.
Then care for the place until it heals.
But if the place is sealed, and materials are cut away from it, and it remains thus for a long time: then know that it has now been completely healed.
And if materials are not cut away from it, then know that it is penetrating, or there is a corrupt opening in its depth, or as if it were one of those [fistulas], the recollection of which will come in its place.
On the Method of Cauterizing the Kidneys.
When pain occurs in the kidneys from cold or thick windiness and weakens because of it a person's body, then it is necessary to cauterize him above the almethenem above the kidneys themselves with a cautery over all the kidney with a clauili cautery, of which remembrance precedes.
And perhaps we should cauterize him a second time on the very almeidatu itself. Therefore three lines will come. Therefore they will be more ultimate in benefit.
Concerning the way of cauterizing the bladder.
When weakness and softening occur in the bladder from cold and humidity so that the sick person does not retain urine, then cauterize him in the lower part of the penis above the bladder where pubic hairs begin, with a cautery from the right side of the penis and another from the left: and let the length of that cauterization be according to the quantity of a knuckle; and cauterize him with a lower back cautery, or two cauteries if necessary: and it should be as preceded by a clauile cautery.
Concerning the way of cauterizing the matrix.
When cold and humidity occur in the matrix and it is forbidden by it from impregnation, and its menses are corrupted, and their provocation is delayed, and pain occurs to her upon their arrival, then it is necessary that she be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel as we said in the cauterization of the bladder, and with a lower back cautery or two cauteries: and let the cautery be clauile.
Concerning the way of cauterizing the ankle in dislocation.
When mucous humidities pour down to the ankle joint and become the cause of its exit from its place: and the sign of this is that one leg is prolonged over the other when they are compared to each other, and a void place is found in it.
Therefore, it is necessary that you apply the weak cautery above the Anchae pixid in a circle similar to the cautery itself. After you mark with encausto in a circle around the pixid, as it rotates; so that the pixid itself falls in the middle of the circle.
But if this cautery is not present for you, then cauterize it with three cauteries, with a large olive cautery; and let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the thickness of all the skin.
Then care for it until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in sciatica.
When pain occurs in the Anchae pixid, and the cause of it is cold and humidity; and the sick person is treated with what we said in the division, and the treatment does not work, and it becomes chronic; then it is necessary to dissolve the sick person from thick humors with foul pills, or with artificial pills, and the like. Then cauterize him.
And the method of cautery in this is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
Cautery with fire is according to many methods.
One of which is that you cauterize above the Anchae pixid itself with three triangular cauteries, according to this form. And make their depth good, or bad. And let the space that is between each cautery be the thickness of a finger; and let the cautery be an olive one.
Sometimes, however, cautery is done in the middle above the head of the Anchae itself. Therefore there are four cauteries.
And if you wish to cauterize with a circle, whose shape precedes in the cauterization of a wide dislocation, make it one: so that it is a circle containing the whole dislocation.
And burn the thickness of all the skin.
This is the method of cautery in sciatica, when the pain adheres to the wide area itself and does not extend as far as the hip and leg.
But if it extends as far as the hip and leg, then cauterize it with two cauteries above the thigh, above the place to which the sufferer points there, in which there is pain, and your cautery above the calf four fingers toward the hairy side a little: and let the cautery be a knife-shaped one.
And let the depth of the cautery be according to the depth of the thickness of the skin.
But if the sufferer points out that the pain extends as far as near the toes, then cauterize it there where he points with a point cautery, three, or four, or more, if he needs it so.
And if he points out the pain to be below the knee towards the leg, then cauterize it there with one knife-shaped cautery.
And beware in all your cauterizations that you do not finish with the cautery so as to burn a nerve or a large artery, and thereby bring upon the sufferer evil harm or contraction through it.
And I myself have indeed already seen one and another, from those who cauterized above the calf, and finished in the cautery, and the leg swelled up until a tumor reached the foot, and it was perforated all through and corrupted altogether: then there followed rupture of the belly, and death after that.
But if the pain is in two parts at the same time, cauterize both according to this method.
And certain wise men have said in the cauterization of a wide area, of which this is the method of cautery. Make a speculum of iron, its diameter half a palm; and let it have at its opening according to the thickness of a fingertip, or a little less: and within that speculum let there be a third speculum.
And let the space that is between all the specula be by the amount of a thumb knot; and let the specula be open from two sides; and let their height be as a thumb knot, or two thumb knots; and make for them a handle of iron suitably fitted to the specula.
Then heat it in fire until it glows and projects sparks; then place it on a pitch plaster, the patient lying on their side with the healthy side down. Then cauterize him with three round cauteries in one go.
Then let them go for three days. Afterwards, apply a plaster with butter; and leave the wound open for many days. Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
Albucasis says, with this type of cautery, O son, we have rarely used it, because of the terror of its appearance; and therefore, because we have found few who would endure it.
Nevertheless, it is among the good cauteries for him who suffers it, and finds its place with it.
A cautery however, with healing medicines is such that you make two specula having a perforated handle into which descends the bar of its door from bronze, or iron, the length of a finger; whose height should be two thumb knots, or approximately so.
And let the space that is between each one be the thickness of a finger, and let them be open below and above; and let that which contains them to each other, according to this form.
Then place it on a pitch plaster, the patient lying on their healthy side. And press your hand firmly upon the broad pestle. Then pour between the two circles water that has been heated slightly with fire and hold it for the space of an hour: let the sick person endure its bite and its burning, for he will find the bite like fire until the bite is quieted.
Then raise your hand with the instrument and wash away the warm water from the whole pestle with fresh water; then let it sit for three days.
And place butter upon it until the blackness of the burn is removed; and let it sit for several days, and pus will flow from it. For it is the final step in healing.
Then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
But if the pain extends as far as the hip or leg: make for him a bath that contains water, according to what you did with the pestle equally.
And this is the method of warm water; and I have already written it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Take alkali and quicklime, each a part equal to the other; grind them both, and put them in a new jar, whose lower part has one small hole according to the quantity that the radius itself will enter: and place under the bottom of the jar another glazed jar: and pour over the alkali and lime fresh water, so that it submerges each by a finger; then press them with your hand with good compression: and let the jar sit until sharp water descends into the lower part of the glazed jar.
Then collect all that water and pour it over other lime; and strain until it is renewed.
For then it will be very strong and sharp, which is administered in many medical operations, and in the cauterizing of other members. Because it effects the operation of fire itself.
And among medicines are those with which they cauterize wounds, such as alum, and gum arabic, and lime mixed with soap, so that both are blended together.
And indeed Galen related a cure of some ancient man, by which he was healed of pain in the neck and sciatic vein; and he greatly praised it. And he said that it did not need any other cure, and that he was healed by a single draught, until he related that perhaps he had gone into a bath and came out of it already well.
And it is to be taken from green rue; and if green is not found, let the dry one be taken, fresh; and it is rubbed much with a little fat, and placed on the wound where there is pain, or leg, or thigh; and it is tied on and left for three hours, or for as long as the sick person feels the heat subside. Then let him enter a bath.
Therefore, when his body becomes warm, put him on a couch. For the pain subsides and he is healed.
And know that no one ought to use a cautery with these medicines except after evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides, who also said this, that goat dung, when it is cauterized with it, causes it to contract; and a cautery is made in this way. Let wool be taken and soaked in old oil, and placed on the deep spot which is between the big toe and the next one, and which is closer to the ankle.
Then take dry goat dung and inflame it in fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then place it on the wool and leave it until it goes out. Then repeat that. Therefore do not cease to do this until the feeling reaches the middle of the leg and the pain subsides.
And this method of cautery is called vaccinum cautery.
On the Cauterization of Back Pain.
Sometimes pain occurs in the back from many causes, either from a fall, or a blow, or excessive evacuation, and similar things, from the infusion of cold and humid matter; and cautery indeed does not apply except in this single species, which is caused by the infusion of cold matter.
Therefore, after the evacuation of the sick person with fetid pills and the like, three lines should be made on the back where there is pain, according to the width of the almeidate itself; after which five cauteries or more are marked with an encausto in each line, according to the amount that comes from the tolerance of the sick person's strength; and cauterization should be done with a point cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries, with a middle-sized clauile cautery, according to this form.
On the Method of Cauterizing in the Onset of Kyphosis.
Very often this disease occurs in young children.
And the sign of its onset in boys is: that a constriction occurs upon him in breathing near the elevation and motion; and the youth in the last vertebra of the back and its nodes, which has already begun to protrude above the other vertebrae.
When therefore you see this, and wish to do it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery according to this form.
And let the cautery encompass all sides of the vertebra equally; and if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a point cautery two or three lines; and let the points be close to one another.
Then care for the place until it heals with what we have said.
And beware, that you do not apply a cautery to a hump which arises from spasm of a nerve.
On the method of cauterizing gout and pains in the joints.
When pains in the joints are from cold humors which flow to any member of the body, then when pains happen in the feet, it is customary for physicians to call that gout specifically.
Therefore, when gout of a cold cause is treated with methods of healing, and the pains are not removed, then a cautery removes them.
And it is to cauterize him after evacuation around the joint of the feet with many cauteries; and let the cautery be olive-wood.
And if it seems best to you to prick upon the face of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. But if the pains ascend as far as the knees, or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize him upon the whole knee with three or four cauteries on every side, with the same olive-wood cautery.
But if more of these cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize him. And do not submerge your hand with the cautery, rather let it be about the thickness of the skin only.
But if the pains ascend to the knees and back, then administer what we said from the cautery in its chapter.
But if the pains are only in the hands, then make punctures around the wrists as two lines revolve.
But if any pain remains in the fingers, then puncture them upon every knuckle, and upon the comb of the hand.
But if the pains ascend after days to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize both on every side.
And do not discharge the weak from good regimen, from reception of medicines. For if good regimen is done, and phlegm is evacuated, he will be healed with the help of God by this cautery.
On the way of cauterizing in ruptures.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, and the intestine descends, or the omentum to the testicle, and it is beginning nearby: then it is necessary that you order the sick person to abstain from food on his day. And let him use laxatives, so that feces may descend from his belly.
Then let him sit between your hands upon his back; and order him to hold his breath until it comes out, or the omentum, or the intestine appears.
Then reduce it with your fingers, and mark with a cautery under the rupture upon the bone of the hip, with a sign whose end is like half a circle towards the upper part of the body.
Then apply the fire to the cautery, which has this shape, until it becomes white and projects sparks. Then reduce the intestine or omentum to its cavity. Then let a servant place his hand upon the spot so that the intestine does not come out; and you have now opened between the sick man's thighs, and placed a cushion beneath him, and a servant above his thighs, and another above his chest who holds his hands.
Then place the cautery upon the mark itself, with your hand holding the cautery upright. And hold it there until you reach the bone with it; or repeat it with another cautery if you have not reached the bone with the first one.
And carefully observe from the exit of the intestine during your cauterization, lest you burn it, and thereby cause great harm or death to the patient.
And know that when you do not achieve an opening with the cauterization, your operation is of no effect.
And it is necessary that the cautery for infants be delicate, according to their size.
Then care for it with other ointments until it is healed.
And let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is sealed.
And it is necessary that you provide him with nourishment for the length of his healing time, which soothes his stomach so that the intestines do not prolapse during straining and defecation.
Then when he wishes to rise after forty days, then apply a well-made bandage and let him wear it for another forty days.
And he should abstain from labor, overeating and drinking, and loud voices.
For when he follows this regimen, he will thus be healed completely.
And I will speak of the treatment of ruptures with an incision in its own chapter.
But when ruptures occur in the rest of the abdomen and are beginning, and you wish them not to increase, then cauterize his rupture with a round cautery according to its size; and let that which is cauterized be about one-third of it. Then care for it as we have said, and it will not increase.
And some first-mentioners have already said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery, according to this form.
After it is marked with a cautery, and a line is placed which is across its width on the upper side of the rupture, and another line below. And place your hand in the middle with a hooked cautery.
But a cautery is first easier and better.
Concerning the manner of cauterizing for pains due to a fall or a blow.
Chapter Forty-Eight.
When pain occurs in certain limbs from a fall or a blow and that pain persists for a long time, and treatment with medicines does not help it, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with a point cautery.
And let the cautery be of every member according to its size and its suitability and its weakness and its power and the location of the twist and the pain from it.
Therefore if it is healed by the first cautery, it is well. If not, then repeat the cautery upon it.
For it is customary for these pains to transfer from one limb to the one next to it. Therefore it is necessary that you pursue them with a cautery until the weak one is healed.
Concerning the manner of cauterizing for leprosy.
Lepers sometimes are greatly helped by cautery. And especially the type of leprosy which comes from putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy; therefore when you wish to cauterize it consider.
If then leprosy is beginning, and you have treated it with what we said in the division, and it does not descend, nor stand still: and you are afraid for the sick person, that corruption may spread over his whole complexion: then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head known, and a second below it towards the forehead at the end of the hair, and two above the two horns, and one behind on the nape of the neck.
And lastly put your hand with the cautery for a short time on it until it makes a small impression, and the crusts separate from it: so that the expiration of gross vapors from it may be relieved; and also cauterize with the cautery the spleen itself according to what was said before.
But if leprosy is already spread over the sick person and appears manifestly: then it is necessary that you cauterize with these cauteries which we said on the head, and with a cautery on the extremity of the nose, and two cauteries on the two maxillas, and two cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one on the buttocks at the root of the tail and one above it, on the very buttock itself: and two on the ankles: namely, one on each ankle, and two on the knees: one on each knee, and two on the shoulders, and two on the elbows, and two on the tendernesses of his chest: and cauterize him on every joint, from the joints of the fingers of his hands and feet: and cauterize on every heel of his feet, and on the knuckles of his hands.
And be careful for yourself from the nerves which are above the last part of the heel so that you do not burn them.
And sometimes one should cauterize with a cautery on the bone of the chest, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more you add cautery, the more benefit there is, and the more healing.
And know that a sick person does not find pain in cauterization, as healthy people do; because his body is already stunned.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be of size and suitability according to the limbs and joints; according to what preceded from the kinds of instruments.
Then care for the cautery with herb flour and honey, and other care, until it heals.
On the manner of cauterizing in a stupor.
When a limb is in a stupor and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters and does not heal, then cauterize the stupefied limb with cauteries, according to what its size or smallness deserves.
And let your cautery penetrate into the thickness of the skin a little. Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
And sometimes it is cauterized for a certain stupor that happens to the hand and foot, at the exits of the nerves which move them.
But let no one presume on that unless he is wise in the anatomy of limbs and the exit of the nerves moving the body.
Chapter LI.
When Albaras grows old and nothing from medical arts takes effect in it; then cauterize over it with a deep cautery for a short time, according to the amount of the skin's thickness until the whiteness is removed and its color is changed.
Then care for it with herb flour and lentils with rose oil, and leaves of arnoglossa, and dove blood, and swallow blood; let there be a portion from each: mix all these things and spread them on cloth and apply to the place until it heals.
On the Method of Cauterizing Cancer.
When cancer is beginning and you wish to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery all around its circumference, as it revolves.
Wise men have said, however, that it should be cauterized with the final cautery in the middle.
However, that does not seem right to me, because I fear that it might ulcerate, and I have already seen that happen many times.
And it is more correct to cauterize it in its circumference with a circle, as we said, or with many cauteries.
On the Method of Cauterizing an Adubelate.
When someone has an adubelate and it is delayed in maturation, either because of excessive moisture causing it or because of the weakness of age, when he is old and with little blood, or because of the time and you wish to hasten the maturation of the adubelate, then cauterize around its circumference with many small cauteries puncturing. Then let it alone. For it will hasten in maturation.
But if you wish to perforate it with a cautery, then use a hot cautery which has this shape.
And place it in the middle of the adubelate until it penetrates the skin; and let the cautery be weaker than the one that follows so that the flow is relieved.
Then care for it until it heals.
On the Method of Cauterizing an Eating Sore.
Chapter Fifty-Four.
A corrosive is nothing but a corruption in a limb that moves about and eats it up; just as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you see a corrosive in a place that can tolerate a cautery with fire, then use many hot cauteries, small and large, according to what suits the place where the corrosive is.
Then cauterize it from every side until you eradicate all corruption and nothing at all remains within.
Then let it alone for three days, and put upon the cauterized places sulfur pounded with oil until all the scabs and all corruption are eradicated.
Then care for it with ointments that produce flesh.
Therefore if you see that after three days healthy flesh is born in which there is no corruption, it is good.
And if not, then repeat the cautery upon that which remains from the corrupt places.
And a corrosive medicine is sometimes applied with a sharp medicine. For it itself arises in the place of the cautery.
However, cautery with fire is of quicker healing, and I indeed already said cauterization of it with a sharp medicine in the division; therefore take it there when it is needed.
Concerning the manner of cauterizing warts and moles.
Chapter Fifty-Five.
Very often this illness occurs in the lower parts of the feet and it is a thick, filtered thing which injures the foot.
And indeed cautery on them is according to two methods: cautery with fire and cautery with hot water.
But as for cautery with fire, it should be a concave cautery like a vulture's feather made of iron according to the size which contains the wart on every side and have subtle edges.
Then place it ignited upon the wart. Then revolve the hand with the cautery around the wart until the cautery reaches the depth of the wart; and let it alone for three days until it begins to emit pus. Then plaster it with mullein leaves crushed with salt and let the plaster remain upon it at night. It itself will be eradicated from its roots.
Then care for the place with a flesh-generating ointment until it heals.
But if they are not inverted, and they often happen on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet; then apply a cautery to them with hot water: and it is necessary that you take a cannula from bronze, or iron, or from a vulture quill: and place it upon a coal, or an althelul. Then pour a small quantity of hot water into the cannula; hold your hand and revolve it with compression of your hand for a little while so that the edge of the cannula is imprinted in the root of the coal, and the hot water finds a way to the depths, to the root of the coal: and let the patient wait for a short time over the bite of the hot water for an hour.
Then dismiss him, for the coal will be eradicated with its roots.
Do this to them one by one until you come upon all that are from them in the body.
Then care for them after they are eradicated with what generates flesh from ointments.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in tremors.
When it happens to someone that a tremor occurs from cold in the nerve, or from quartan fever, or another: then it is necessary for you to cauterize him with four cauteries, or five upon the dorsal vertebrae, and between every vertebra a cautery, and on his chest a cautery, and upon his stomach a cautery.
For the tremor subsides with an olive-oil cautery, and hastens the healing of the cold illness.
Concerning the method of cauterizing according to Albathir.
Chapter Fifty-Seven.
Sometimes foul albathir are expelled in the body, that is, pustules, which are made from corrupted thick materials.
Therefore, it is necessary first that when they appear, they be cauterized over the entire head of the pustules with a delicate cautery made of myrtle wood, whose end has been ignited with fire. Or with a long aristolochia root. Or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
And sometimes they are cauterized at the very beginning of their expulsion in this way: and they do not grow larger: and the excess is broken down making them, and they are healed from them.
However it is necessary that this be done after evacuation with phlebotomy.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in a flow of blood from an artery in a wound.
Very often it happens that there is a flow of blood from an artery which has been cut at a wound, which occurs externally, or at the incision of an abscess, or the cautery of a limb, and similar things to these; and it becomes difficult to stop it.
Therefore when this happens to someone then hurry with your hand to the orifice of the artery and place your index finger upon it; and press it very much until the blood is confined beneath your finger and nothing comes out from it.
Then place a small olive-wood cautery into the fire, and many more of a large size; and blow upon them until they become very ignited.
Then take one from them, either a small or large one according to the wound and the place where the artery has been severed, and apply the cautery upon it; after which you quickly remove your finger and hold the cautery until the blood is cut off.
If it is expelled when you raise your finger from the orifice of the artery and you extinguish the cautery, then quickly take another cautery from those that are prepared in the fire.
Therefore do not cease to do this with one after the other until the blood is cut off.
And beware that you do not burn the nerve which is there, and other harm befall the sick person.
And know that when blood flows from an artery it is not possible to cut it off; especially when the artery is large, except with one of four methods. Or with a cautery, as we have said. Or with extraction, when it has not been extracted. For when it is extracted, its extremities contract, and the blood is cut off. Or it is tied with a strong ligature thread. Or medicines of a nature to cut off blood are placed upon it, and it is bound with a decent constricting bandage.
But whoever performs its cutting off with a ligature, and constriction with cloth, or application of burning things, and similar methods, does not heal it completely except rarely.
But if it should happen to someone and there is no doctor or medicine present, then let him begin by placing the index finger over the opening of the vein itself, as we have described, and constricting it tightly until the blood is blocked from above the wound and over the artery. And the finger should not be removed, but water of a very cold temperature should constantly be poured over it until the blood freezes and thickens, and is cut off.
Meanwhile he should consider what he needs from a cautery or medicine.
On Incision, Perforation, and Phlebotomy in Wounds and Similar Things.
We have already said in the First Chapter that every illness for which it is appropriate to use fire with a cautery and burning medicine, its occasions, causes, instruments, and forms of cauteries.
And I placed chapters there from the head to the foot.
And I will proceed in this chapter the same way so that it may be relieved for the one seeking his question.
And before I begin that, it is necessary that you learn, oh sons, that in this chapter there is from the terror that which is in the first chapter on cauterization.
And on account of that it is necessary that there be more caution in this one, because in the operation which is in this chapter, very often evacuation occurs with blood, with which life stands at the opening of a vein, or incision over an abscess, or opening of an exit wound, or healing of a wound, or extraction of an arrow, or incision over a stone, and those similar: from all of which trembling and fear are associated, and death falls upon many of them.
And I warn you, lest that which is hesitation fall upon you, for sometimes there fall upon you in this art ways of men with ways of illnesses. For from them is he who becomes angry with his illness, and death is easy for him on account of the vehemence which he finds from his illness and the length of its malice. And with illness there is fear which signifies death.
And from them is he who gives his lyre player and enriches you with it, hoping for healing, and his illness is harmful.
Therefore it is not necessary that you consent to him who comes to you from them, whose way is such. And let your caution be more vehement than your greed and your avarice. And do not presume upon anything from that, except after certain knowledge, which verifies at you that to which praiseworthy succession arrives.
And use in the healing of all your sick a prognosis and an indication concerning it to which conveniently belongs health.
For in that there is help for you in acquiring fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire in you his intellect, and not take away from you direction and inspiration: for that is in his hand.
And I indeed ordered this chapter by distinguishing it into chapters, according to what preceded in the chapter on Cautery, from the neck down to the feet: so that you may be relieved of what you seek and need from it.
Concerning the treatment of water which gathers in the heads of children.
Chapter I.
Know that this infirmity often happens to boys at birth: or when the midwife tightens the head of the boy without gentleness.
And whenever it also happens from a hidden cause which is not known.
And I indeed have not seen this illness in anyone but boys; and to all whom I have seen from them, death has hastened: therefore it seemed to me to abandon the operation in it.
And I indeed saw from them a boy whose head was filled with water, and his head swelled every day until he could not sit upon himself because of the size of his head: and the humidity increased until he died.
And this humidity indeed gathers either between the skin and the bone; or it gathers under the bone above the suture.
And the operation in that case, if it is humidity between the skin and the bone, and it is a small abscess, then it is necessary for you to make a fissure in the middle of the head one fingerbreadth wide: and let the length of the fissure be as much as two knuckles until the humidity runs out.
And this is the form of a spatula.
If therefore the humidity is increased more and the abscess is larger, then make those two fissures according to this form.
And if the humidity is under the bone and the sign of it is that you see the sutures of the head open from every side: and the water sinks when you press it with your hand to its inside, and it is not hidden from you; then it is necessary for you to make in the middle of the head three fissures according to this manner.
And after the incision, extract all the moisture. Then bind the fissures with cloths and lint. Then embrocate it from above with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then loosen the bandage, and care for the wound with tents and ointments.
And do not allow the head to be compressed evenly. And feed the weak with all dry food of little humidity, until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another manner of incision is, that you consider where the magnitude of the abscess appears, and the collection of water.
For sometimes it is more at the back of the head, or at the top of the head, or on the right, or on the left.
Therefore ascend with the incision where you see the abscess and the filling of water: and cleave it according as is possible for you.
And observe, lest you strike an artery, and there be a flow of blood, and the weak person dies from that flow with the evacuation of moisture.
Concerning the incision of arteries which are behind the ears.
Chapter II.
When it happens to someone that catarrh occurs at the eyes, or at the chest, and it becomes old, and treatment with medicines does not benefit it: then a more final remedy is in this case, incision of these two arteries.
Therefore it is necessary when you wish to incise them, that the sick person shall shave his head. Then rub the place with a rough cloth, so that the arteries may appear. Then let the sick person compress his neck, with any of his cloths. Then consider where the vein pulses. And the places of both are places which are depressed behind the ears: and it rarely conceals itself, unless in some people.
Then mark with a cautery over each one; and incise each one with a scalpel on both sides, the incision reaching the mouth; and let it be done across the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert a speculum beneath the artery and cut it above with an incision.
And let the length of the incision be like two joined fingers.
For when a vein is cut, blood flows out in a pulsing stream, which rises to the insides with frequent leaps.
But if the artery does not appear to the sense, then it is necessary that you measure from the ear a distance of three fingerbreadths. Then mark with sealing wax and cut down to the bone.
And that which ought to be emitted from the blood is six ounces, and perhaps you may emit from it more or less. All of this according to the quantity which appears to you from the weakness of the sick person and the fullness of his artery.
Then consider the wound. Then if anything remains at the bone from the incision, then cut it so that a hot abscess may not occur: then bind the wound with strips of linen cloth.
Then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
Concerning the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
Chapter III.
When it happens to a man that he has an old headache or sharp catarrh because of acrimonious humors and heat in the temples, or an old soda, vehement, and similar things: and it is treated with the methods of medical treatment and it does not help, then we have found in these illnesses the extraction of arteries from the temples, or cauterization of them, as we have narrated.
And the method of operation in extracting them is that the sick person shaves the hairs which are in the temples and stretches towards the apparent artery in the temple. For it indeed shows itself to you from its pulse and rarely is it concealed except in a few people or vehement cold.
If it is concealed from you, then let the weak person bind their head with any cloth they have: then rub the place with a rough cloth. Or vaporize the place with warm water until it appears to you manifestly. Then take the spatula, which I had previously made. Then flay the skin with it easily until you reach the artery. Then throw a hook into it and draw it upwards until you draw it out of the skin and make it come out from all the tunics that are under it.
But if the artery is slender: then enfold it with the extremity of the hook. Then cut a part from it according to the amount by which its extremities are lengthened and contracted so that bleeding does not occur. For if it is not incised and if it is not cut off, the blood does not ascend thoroughly.
Then evacuate from the blood six ounces up to three.
But if the artery is large: it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread: or with al-hodad cords so that putrefaction does not hasten to it before the consolidation of the wound and bleeding occurs.
Then cut off the excess which is between the two ligatures. Do that in that hour or another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery up to the bone with a knife cautery until its extremities fall and it stands in place of the same work.
And it is a better operation unless the weak person has a fever or a hot complexion. Because a cautery is one of those that help to finish humidities. Therefore it is a better remedy.
And it is necessary after the extraction of the arteries, that the place be filled with well-cooked lint: and let poultices be placed on top of it loosely made.
And after the loosening, it should be treated with dry medicines, which cause flesh to grow, and with dressings, until it is healed.
And if meanwhile while you are working there should occur a flow of blood from an artery, then hasten to cut it off with a cautery, or to fill the place with wool; and bind your hand until the blood is severed. And if none of these things are present to you, then place your finger upon the place until the blood coagulates. And embrocate the place with water of violent cold, until the sharpness subsides, and it is bound as is necessary.
And because that which is lighter and easier for the extraction of an artery is, to cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives; let the sharpness of the two knives be like a razor. However they are of much less sharpness than two knives. For if they are sharp like two knives, cold quickly follows to both; and they do not strike the flesh with speed. Therefore since there is a little thickness in them, the heat of the fire is retained in them, and the flesh is cut quickly; with this therefore the work is better than all other work, and lighter, and easier.
And this is the form of the cautery.
And let the space which is between the two knives be the thickness of a finger, after you have marked two places with sealing wax; and lay both ignited strongly, until they reach the mouth, and they strike the vein in two places: so that what is between its ends is lengthened. For they are not fully consolidated with this cautery.
Chapter IV.
On the treatment of sharp, persistent courses of tears from the eyes.
When tears are persistent and the course of them is from the veins which are upon the exterior skull; and no medicine treatment confers anything upon them with medicines, and you see the face of the sick person already reddening, and he feels in his forehead a walking motion, as there is a walking motion of ants; and his eyes are weakened, moist, so that his hairs are already corroded by corrosion; and his eyelids are heated from the sharpness of the tears; then the ancients used this operation in their treatment, and they called it treatment with a Sword.
And it is to be commanded that the patient shave the hairs on his forehead. Then make three incisions in the forehead at equal distances according to the length of the forehead; and let the length of each incision be about two fingers; and let one incision be equidistant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second a little distance beyond the length according to the movement of the tear ducts, and the third on the other side; and beware of cutting the arteries which are on both sides; and extend your hand from the continuation of the two mandibles, and let the space of the whole incision be the size of three joined fingers; and have a piece of sponge or many dry cloths ready with which to dry the blood.
Then introduce a speculum with two pointed ends, of which the following form will be. From the incision which is from the temple side to the second incision; and with it flay all the skin that is between the two incisions, along with the flesh which is above the mouth. Then do the same from the middle incision to the second incision. Then withdraw this speculum and insert into the first incision again another instrument which is called a sharp curette, blunt on one side and not sharp on the other. And this is its form.
And place the sharp side of it toward the flesh joined with the skin, and the blunt side towards the mouth; and press it until it reaches the middle fissure; and cut off with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes, except that the incision be continued up to what appears from the skin.
Then do the same in the middle fissure up to the other fissure.
And when an equal quantity runs out of blood, squeeze out the places from the clots of congealed blood.
Then place a linen wick steeped in old wine upon all the fissures; and put poultices soaked in wine, oil or vinegar over them. And see that a hot abscess does not occur.
And on the third day, loosen the ligature, and administer much infusion with warm water. Then treat it with royal ointment, and other things with which wounds are healed: until it is healed.
Chapter Five.
On the treatment of sharp tears and cataracts to the eyes from within the head.
When acute, sharp, and persistent catarrs occur to someone: and you see his eyes weakened, small, and their aspect already debilitated: and the eyelids ulcerated, and hair falls out from them, and there is a sharp, hurting pain in the depth of the head, and consequent sneezing: then take from these accidents that those matters and catarrhs do not come except from many veins.
And the better cure in them is this. And it is, that you order the sick person to shave his forehead. Then make one fissure in the middle of the forehead, or another a little further by width, and begin with the fissure from the left temple to the right temple: and let the incision be up to the mouth: and extend your hand from the muscles of the temples, which are moved at mastication: until when the mouth is uncovered: and you will dry all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate between the two lips of the fissure with old thread, or with linen strips. Then constrict from above with lint: and soak the lint with wine and oil, so that a hot abscess does not occur.
And when you loosen that, and you see that the hot abscess already diminishes: then it is necessary for you to cauterize the mouth until flesh begins to be born in it.
Then treat it with a drying regimen that causes flesh to be born: such as if you take two parts from wheat flour, and four parts from colophony: and prepare an adhesive plaster from them, and administer it until the birth of flesh in these wounds.
Chapter Six.
On the treatment of that which falls into the ear.
Everything that falls into the ear is one of four types: either a mineral stone, or something like a stone, such as iron and glass; or it is from a plant, such as chickpeas and beans; or it is a fluid substance, such as water, vinegar, and things similar to them; or some animal.
Therefore, when a stone or a type of stone falls into the ear from those which are not added to and do not grow in the ear, expose the ear to the sun: if then you see the stone, then distill something from violet oil or sesame oil into the ear. Then perform its extraction and make him sneeze with something that has been mashed up, and plug his nostrils at the time of the sneeze, after you place into the circumference of the ear wads from cloths or wool, and extend the ear upward.
Very often it comes out with this care.
But if it does not come out, then administer its extraction with forceps, that is, with subtle pincers: whose form is this.
If therefore it comes out with the forceps, it is good.
And if not, then administer its extraction with a thin blind hook of few turns.
If therefore it does not come out through that, then make a cannula from bronze, and insert the end of the cannula into the ear canal far, and plug what is in the circumference of the cannula with softened wax with oil so that there is no way for air except through the cannula: then extract it with your strong suction.
Very often it comes out with what we have narrated. But if it does not come out this way: then take a small amount from hellebore, or from birdlime, that is, prepared gluten with which birds are caught; and place it on the end of a probe after you have wrapped a well-placed wad upon it: then insert it into the ear canal with ease after you have dried the ear from moisture.
If therefore it does not go out with all that we have narrated, then hasten to incise, before a hot abscess or spasm occurs.
And the manner of incision is, that the phlebotomist should first make a small incision on the cephalic vein; and draw from him blood according to his strength. Then make the sick person sit between your hands, and turn his ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear near his fat in a depressed place; and let the incision be crescent-shaped, until you reach the stone; then remove it with what is possible for you from the instruments.
Then sew up the incision quickly with care, until it heals.
But if the thing falling into the ear is one of the grains that grow and swell; then perform its extraction.
But if it does not yield to your efforts for removal, then take a fine, slender spatula according to this form.
And apply it to cut off that type of grain which falls into the ear, and do not do this when you think that the grain is already moistened by the vapor of the ear until you have put many splinters into it; then extract them with hooks or a fine probe or suction as we have said, for its extraction is alleviated.
But as for the water which enters into the ear, it is necessary that the sick person should use sneezing when he first sits down; and he has already filled his ear with some old cooked oil; and he lies on that ear in which there is water. If therefore it comes out through it, it is good.
And if not: then take many stones according to the length of a finger, thin and smooth, and heat them slightly with fire, and let the sick person insert one of them into the opening of his ear; and leap on one of his feet from that side, and strike it with another stone upon the one which is in the ear. Therefore, he should not cease to do that with stone and stone until all the water comes out.
And now the water comes out so that you may take one from a crucible, or from a rush, and insert one of its ends into the ear; and you ignite the other end with fire until most of it is burned up. Then repeat with another rush, and do that many times until all the water comes out; and extract it with a tube according to what was said in the stone.
However, in the extraction of an animal entering into it, if it is of small body, such as a flea, and the like, take care of it as I said in the division.
But if it is of large body, which appears to the senses; then administer its extraction with gestures and hooks; and its matter is easier than all those that are held in the ear.
However, in the extraction of a generated worm in the ear, when you care for it with what we said in the division and in the treatise on distillations, and your treatment does not work; then it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sun. If therefore something from worms appears there, then extract it with gestures or with subtle hooks.
But if nothing appears there, then take a tube, which has this shape, narrow below, wide above; and insert the subtle end into the ear according to the amount that the weak one can tolerate it; then suck with strong suction. Do that many times until all the worms come out.
But if they do not obey you for the exit, then cauterize the circumference of the tube with wax, as I said in the stone.
But if they do not come out with what we said; then administer distillations which the ancients have already experienced in the infection of worms; and you will find it in the treatise on distillations.
And let your effusion with which you pour oil and medicines into the ear be with this instrument, whose form is depicted here. As you see, make it yourself from silver, or bronze, narrow below, in which there be a small hole, wide above.
Let it therefore be so that driving what is in the concavity of the cannula, be made decently from bronze. And if you wish, take a ray, and involve cotton in its extremity with decent involution; then pour oil, or juice, or whatever you wish from these medicines into the cannula; and let the cannula itself be in the ear; then introduce the ray with cotton above, and press it with your hand with temperate compression until the oil is driven into the concavity of the hearing, and the sick person feels it within; and let that which is poured into the ear already be warmed a little with fire; and beware lest anything that is distilled into it be very cold: for medicines do not tolerate that.
Chapter VII.
On the cure of an accidental Auricular Exudation.
Sometimes certain infants issue from the wombs of their mothers not perforated.
And it also happens to some people that an exudation occurs in the auditory passage from a wound, or flesh born therein.
And this exudation sometimes occurs in the depth of the ear hole, which does not follow sight; and sometimes it happens to the outer part of the hole a little, and follows it by sight.
That which occurs in the depth of the ear, and which does not comprehend the view, is in many dispositions difficult healing.
And in that which follows sight, it is necessary for you to place the ear of the sick person in the sun, and look into it; then if you see an apparent exudation, open it with a subtle speculum, whose form is as follows: let its extremity be where there is a small breadth, of which a part be acute; and let the rest of the speculum be of two smooth sides, so that it does not injure the ear.
If therefore the growth is from the flesh born in the ear canal: then hold it with a fine hook, and cut into it with strong ease, until all the flesh is removed.
But if the growth is deep in the ear: then take a fine, gentle ray, and heat it slightly with fire: then put it into the ear canal.
If therefore you perceive the growth with that which the weak find with gravity of hearing, endeavor its opening with ease: and beware, lest you wound the nerves of the ear.
Then place in the ear a linen compress according to the quantity of the amplitude of the hole which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment: do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound.
Or take linen and infuse it in rose water, and sprinkle upon it powdered zedoary, and use it.
But if you see the ear already to have become abscessed: then it is necessary that you remove the linen and allow it with another linen which you wrap in cerate made with rose oil, until the hot abscess subsides: then care for it until it heals.
But if a flow of blood should occur: then immerse a sponge or cloths in cold water and place them upon the ear: and use the remaining care which separates the flow of blood as mentioned in the treatise on distillations.
Concerning the Care of Althel's Eyelids.
Chapter Eight.
These althel which occur on the eyelids of the eye are sometimes moist, and sometimes dry.
Therefore it is necessary that you hold them with tweezers: or with a hook, and cut into them with a scalpel from their roots. Then place upon the spots powdered zedoary.
But if blood should flow from them, then cauterize them with a fine lentil-shaped cautery.
And to cauterize them, is better after incision. For very often they return when something remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and they do not return.
On the Treatment of Hailstones on the Eyelid.
Chapter Nine.
Very often there occurs in the eyelids something which is likened to a Hailstone in its firmness and hardness, and on account of that it is called a Hailstone: and it is an aggregation of thick humidity in the upper eyelid, and the lower eyelid.
Therefore the operation on them is, that you consider then whether it is a Hailstone proceeding from it, which appears from the eyelid and moves to every part, and its matter is easy.
Therefore make above it a fissure through its breadth. Then scrape it from every part with ease until it comes out. Then suspend it with a hook and cut it off.
But if the cutting of it is not prepared for you except after you penetrate the eyelid with an incision a little, then that harms the weak one somewhat.
But if the fissure is large: then join it together with suture: and take care of it until it heals.
And if it is small, no harm will come to you from it. For ointment restores it and makes it flesh.
And if the hailstone is sloping toward the inner parts of the ear toward its inner surface, then turn back the eyelid and suspend the hailstone with a hook; besides which you will need an incision and press it from every part.
But if the eyelid is lengthened by the incision, that does not harm anyone somewhat.
Then wash the eye after the incision of the hailstone with salt water and take care of the place with that which makes flesh until the weak one heals.
On the Treatment of Eyelash Ailments.
Chapter Ten.
Axirnath is a fat which is generated in the tunic of the upper eyelid; and it most often happens to boys; and it weighs down their eyes, and they have catarrhs in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun, because tears rush to them, and on account of that you see them lying face down upon themselves always, and sleeping on them, and their eyelids are moist beneath their eyebrows, which already has been covered by swelling; and indeed the eminence of Axirnath is visible to the eye, and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel Axirnath between them.
And the method of operating on it is for the patient to put his head in your lap.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare on it tow, and make from the tow a circle according to the quantity which contains the Axirnath on all sides. Then place him upon it and press with your fingers from all sides so that the Axirnath gathers in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle of that moisture with an entering scalpel fissures across its width, and let there not be a fissure larger than that which is made in phlebotomy in depth.
Or it is necessary that you cut all the skin until you reach the Axirnath; for in many dispositions the Axirnath proceeds from the fissure according to the shape of a white tallow candle.
Therefore extract it with the cloth which you inserted between your fingers to the outside; and you turn your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed; and beware lest you add anything in the fissure so that you do not reach with the scalpel to the eye and injure it.
But if the Axirnath does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, you add a little into the fissure with ease until the Axirnath proceeds. Then extract it, as we have said.
Then immerse cloths in vinegar and water, and place them over the area, and bind it with bandages.
And there are those among men who grind salt, and put it into the hollow of the fissure so that it liquefies what remains from that moisture.
Then care for it until it heals.
But if a hot abscess should occur there, then treat it with soothing plasters until it heals.
On the methods of treating a relaxed eye, that is, when the eyelid softens, causing it to bulge as it should not.
Chapter XI.
When hairs in addition to the natural course of hairs are born on the eyelids, and grow crooked: then they harm the eye, and cause illnesses to occur, such as continuous tears, and softening of the eyelids, and leukoma, until it becomes a cause of the destruction of the eye.
And indeed, relaxed eye is treated according to four methods. Or by cautery with fire. Or with a sharp medicine, as previously stated in the chapter on cautery. Or relaxed eye is treated by incision and suture. Or by means of canes, as I will explain.
You must place the head of the sick person on your lap. Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
Therefore if it is turned, it is good. And if not: insert a needle into it, in which there is a thread from the lower part of the eyelid, and make the needle with thread penetrate from above, so that it is near the hairs themselves, that is, near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs are born: then draw the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn it with a rod.
Then find on the inner part of the eyelid under the added hairs with the spatula incident from the larger lacrimal to the smaller lacrimal.
Then extract the thread, and place under the eyelid a small ball of lint from cotton or cloth; then mark upon the eyelid with cerate in the form of a myrtle leaf.
However it is necessary that the figure be made according to the quantity and elevation of the eyelid; because this is now diversified in men.
For among them there are some who need a large quantity to be cut from the eyelid according to the quantity that is softened by the eyelid.
Then with the spatula find above the two lines that you have marked and begin from the larger lacrimal to the smaller lacrimal, and let there be one fissure near the natural hairs as is the thickness of a ray.
Then insert the hook into one of the two angles of the skin. Then scarify the entire skin itself. Then join the two lips with suture using a sharp needle and fine wool thread; and wash away the blood, and make what overflows from the threads adhere to the two eyebrows with certain occult things if you wish to do this; and if not, do not care.
Then leave the suture and threads for three or four days, then afterward take care of it.
And if you wish, leave the wound without suture and care for it with that which dries and constricts it. For the eyelid rises at the sealing of the wound and its joining; but it will be better in the future.
This method of healing was taught by the ancients according to Ataxmir.
However there is anxiety about the sick person, and it is from a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And there is another method in Ataxmir also; and it is that you mark upon the eyelid a figure which is like the shape of a myrtle leaf as we have narrated.
Then raise the eyelid with three separate or joined hooks, according to this form, and then cut off what overflows with small forceps, according to this form, with equal incision.
But if it is not possible for you to hold the hook, and it does not fit: then take a needle with thread in it, and insert it into the middle of the figure; and insert another thread near the larger lacrimal, and a second thread near the smaller lacrimal; and join the threads between your fingers equally.
Then raise your hand with equal elevation; and raise the skin above which is the marked cot, as we have described.
Then join the two lips of the wound with suture; and care for it until it heals.
But if an abscess should occur at your incision or fissure: dry it up with cerate and the like, from soothing ointments.
And sometimes it happens that the eyelashes of the eyelid also turn around.
Therefore, you must use what we said in the incision; but the suture for both is more artful. Concerning the care of Ataxmir with dogs.
AND it is necessary to turn the eyelid and split the fissure that is within, according as I have described. Then make two canes, or two slender pieces of wood; whose length is according to the length of the eyelid, and whose width is less than the width of a span; and you have already cut into the ends of each from both sides where you hold the threads.
Then join each with subtlety over what overflows from the eyelid of the eye, and tighten the two canes from both sides with a strong binding, and leave it for several days. For the skin that is tightened will die and blacken and putrefy until it falls off by itself.
If then it is delayed, cut it with forceps. Then care for it until it heals.
When therefore it becomes firm, elevate the eyelid: and the hairs do not sting.
And this is the form of two tubes, which you will make according to this figure, and quantity in length and width.
Chapter Twelve.
On raising stinging hairs in the eye with a needle.
The operation on it is, that you take a fine needle, and insert into it a fine, soft thread from silk. Then you gather its extremities, and tie both with a fine knot very tightly: and let the length of the threads be one palm.
Then place another fine thread under it briefly in an Alinxotati, and tie its extremities if you wish.
Then let the patient put his head in your lap, and be near the sun so that the operation is declared: because it is a subtle, or minute operation.
Then insert the needle with the Alinxotati into the root of the eyelid, and make it penetrate into the eyelid quickly, until you draw it out from above the natural hair.
Then draw the hair up to above the Alinxotati: and insert into the Alinxotati that hair: if it is one, or two, or three, no more.
Then draw your hand with it until the hair emerges with the Alinxotati into the eyelid with the natural hair.
But if the Alinxotati is drawn, and the hair does not emerge with it: draw the Alinxotati downwards, with the thread which you placed in it, until the Alinxotati emerges from the upper opening, and you see it with the eye's vision: then indeed draw the Alinxotati and the thread: and pull out both, and close the eye: and let it remain closed for two days, or three, until the hair adheres to its place, and flesh grows over it.
If the hair is short, then either join to it a long hair from natural hairs, and raise it with it; or leave it alone until it lengthens after a while, and then raise it.
Chapter Thirteen.
When this alxatrati happens to the eye, it is called Leporina.
And this alxatrati is either natural or accidental.
Accidental therefore arises from the consolidation of a wound, or incision, or cautery, and similar things to these.
And the method of operation in this is that you open that consolidation and separate its lips, and put into it a ligature of linen thread, and bind it until it heals.
And it is not necessary that you use things in its treatment which dry and constrict: for if you do that, the alxatrati returns worse than it was; rather use in it things which soften, such as fenugreek; and embrocate with water in which marshmallow root and flaxseed have been boiled; and ointment of dyaquilon which has been liquefied with some oil; and wrap it with a linen cloth, and care for it with that.
And the treasure of your treatment is, that you try with all your ingenuity, so that it does not consolidate according to the form which it was at first.
And indeed this operation which we have said is not except a certain correction of the alxatrati, so that it does not return to the form of the place according to what it entirely was.
Concerning the care of alxatrati which occurs in the lower eyelid, and is a wrinkle or contraction upward to the right and left.
Chapter Fourteen.
This alxatrati which occurs below is the one that truly is called alxatrati. It is natural and it is accidental.
And the accidental kind is made from a wound, or fissure, or cautery, and things similar to those.
And the way of operation on it is that you take a needle with a double thread and stain it with flesh color, and make it penetrate from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh upwards with the needle and cut it with a broad scalpel. Therefore if the shape of the eyelid returns as it should be, it is good.
And if not, take a ray and place it in the fissure and turn it with the eyelid; and make two fissures on the inner side of the eyelid, let the ends of the two fissures be from the two angles of the incision until they meet and form an angle: until when they come together the shape of them becomes this shape, and it is the letter lambda.
Then remove that flesh by the amount which is its sharp lower side, from that which follows the eyelid. Then join the separate parts; sew them with wool thread.
Then care for them with what we said, about softening medicines and cleansing ones, until they are healed.
And if a luxation should happen from the fissure and suture or cautery: then it is necessary that you make a flat fissure under the eyelashes of the eyelid, also according to what preceded. Then separate between the two lips with cleanser, according to what we said.
And the sum of the speech about the care of luxation, when it is above or below, is that the operation runs in it according to what is prepared from the form of the luxation.
For it itself is of many different forms; and a skillful craftsman prepares his ingenuity with whichever way is possible for him, until he may return the shape to its natural form or near it, and himself, according to what suits him from the operation and instruments in many positions.
Chapter Fifteen.
Concerning the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva, or cornea.
Sometimes this consolidation occurs in many people, so that the upper eyelid consolidates with the white of the eye and prevents it from its natural operations.
Therefore, you must insert the extremity of a radius under the eyelid and raise it upward; or extend it with a hook; then incise the adhesion with a fine spatula, which is not sharp like the incision of other spatulas, but rather slightly blunt: so that the weak person is not disturbed during the operation, and the spatula is removed and does not injure the eye with its sharpness; and let your incision be as if you were scraping away that adhesion easily, until the eyelid returns to its natural form, and the entire adhesion is healed.
Then pour salt water into the eye, with blue water itself; or distill into it from a sieve made, from ziniar dissolved with water.
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with flaxseed linen; and place wool infused with egg white on the eye; and after the third day use a sieve, and with compresses, until it is healed.
Concerning the incision of the nail and eminence of the lacrimal flesh.
Chapter Sixteen.
Know that the nail is according to two ways. Either it is nervous; and it is similar to a hard, thin reed. Or it is not nervous, similar to frozen white humidity; which when it touches iron, or you try to grasp it with a hook, it breaks off, and the hook does not stick in it.
And both kinds do not begin except from the larger lacrimal, until it gradually spreads, until it covers vision and prevents light and the movement of the eye.
And the method of operating in its incision is: that the weak person should place their head in your lap. Then open his eyes and raise his eyelid with your hand. Then take a nail with a small hook and extend it upward. Then take a needle and insert into it a hair from the hairs of a horse, ox, or cow; and let the thread be strong, and double the end of the needle a little, and fix it in the middle of the nail; and penetrate it with the needle, and tie the nail with the thread, and extend it upward: and flay with the hair the side of the nail which follows the pupil, as if you were to grasp it with the hair up to its end.
Then cut the remainder at the root of the lacrimal with a fine speculum, or with small forceps; and let go the natural flesh of the lacrimal, so that a constant course of tears does not occur from its incision.
And sometimes the nail is extended with the hook alone; or with thread, as we have said. Then flay it with a gentle speculum, which has this shape.
And be careful that the speculum does not touch the corneal tunic, and a rupture occurs in it, and the pupil is perforated.
Then after the incision, throw something crushed salt, or made from a sieve out of ziniar into the eye and leave it until the next day. Then take care of it with what is necessary until it is healed.
But if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert a needle into it, nor does a hook attach to it, then this kind of nail is often healed with medicine, and is healed as I have related in the division.
But if you wish to cut it, then open the eye of the sick person and take a subtle, gentle, dull-pointed speculum, according to this form. And shave the nail from above with reason and subtlety. If you see that it becomes thin and breaks up, and a razor presses into it, then distill from your hour into the eye a sieve made of zinc, or a red sieve, or ground salt; and bathe the eye until another day.
Then repeat the operation on it until all of it is removed. Unless there is a hot abscess in your eye; for then let it alone and treat the abscess until it heals.
Then repeat the operation on it with a razor until it heals.
But if the prominence of the tear duct causes great harm to the eye, suspend it with a hook and cut a part from it; and do not close the incision so that the course of tears does not occur.
Then instill into the tear duct a red sieve or one made from zinc until it heals.
On the incision of Alguardenic and flesh born in the eye.
Chapter XVII.
Sometimes red flesh is born in the eyes of some men, superimposed or composed, until it covers the pupil, or approaches it, or tightens upon the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelids outward; and it resembles a rose balustrade.
And there is also an operation on it, so that the sick person places his head on your lap. Then open his eyes and collect all that flesh with suitable hooks; and hold it with one forceps or a hand.
Then cut the flesh first until all of it is finished with a surgical knife. And be careful of the eye so that you do not injure it during the operation; and let your incision with which you cut it, be either with a scalpel, which we have described in the incision of a nail, or with small forceps, with which pus is collected, according to what its form will come after this chapter.
When therefore your incision is complete, and the whole of the algardenici is removed, then fill the eye with pounded salt: or distill into it red powder, and those similar to it from corrosive medicines: and put on the eye outside cotton with linen so that it may be guarded against a hot abscess.
But if anything remains of the algardenici, and hot blood dominates you, and you fear a hot abscess: then leave the eye alone, and treat it with that which subdues an abscess.
Then repeat the procedure upon it until it is healed.
And do similarly with added flesh which occurs in the eye from this kind.
However it is necessary that strangers should perform the treatment of every weak eye from natural or accidental causes with iron; and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that that member can tolerate it.
On the Collection of Sebum from the Eye.
Chapter XVIII.
Sebum are red veins which spread over the eye and prevent vision from its operation: and they weaken the eye with the length of days.
It is necessary therefore for you first to consider if the eye in which there is sebum is strong and there is no sickness in it except the sebum: then collect its sebum.
And it is necessary that you instruct the weak person to put their head in your lap.
Then suspend those veins with one hook, or two according to your prudence: and let the hook be subtle of double shape, according to this form, or let there be two hooks graded into one body, according to this form.
Then collect those veins with subtle forceps with subtlety, and wash away the blood hour by hour until you see those veins being removed from the eye and resolved; and be careful not to injure the eye with the ends of the speculum.
Let your operation be in the middle of the day before the sun, and be very steadfast in your operation so that you do not fall except upon those veins.
And when you have finished, then distill into the eye a green or red sieve so that its sharpness may corrode what remains from the sebum.
But if it is not possible for you to collect all of it in that hour, then plaster the eye with something which quiets the pain of the eye and let it be for several days until its pain subsides and guard it from a hot poultice; then repeat upon it in the same manner until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps.
Concerning the reduction of a deviated septum to the nose.
Chapter XIX.
Physicians call a deviated septum a fistula, which you should treat with a cautery or with a sharply burning medicine, according to what was previously stated concerning it.
And if it does not heal, then there is no skill in it except to cut above the abscess at its origin and extract all the moisture that is in it and the pus until the opening is exposed.
Therefore, when the opening is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then excise it with an instrument whose form is this.
And it is called an Asperi's head.
Let it be made of tempered iron, and let its head be round like an azir, which should be punctured with the puncture of a file or with a delicate puncture of a sharp chisel and place it upon the corrupted place of the bone.
Then revolve it between your fingers and press your hand upon it a little while until you know that the corruption has already been scraped away; and do this several times.
Then restore the place with drying astringent medicines.
Therefore, if the place consolidates and flesh grows in it and the flow of blood is cut off; and it remains for forty days and does not reoccur and does not become abscessed and no accident happens to it: then you know that it has already been healed.
And if not, then there is no skill in it except to reduce the fistula to the nostril orifice, according to this manner.
And it is, so that you expose the second bone with an iron, or with a sharp medicine; and when the bone has been exposed, then take an auger according to this manner, let its iron end be triangular: and let its wood be a pyramid tapered down to the extremity, as you see.
Then place that upon the bone itself; and let it be near the tear duct; and extend your hand a little from the eye. Then revolve your hand with the auger until it penetrates the bone, and it feels weak; through this it finds wind coming out of it, when he holds his hand over his nose.
Therefore then restore the place with styptic drying medicines, as I taught you.
When therefore flesh is born, and the place hardens; then the matter which was flowing to the outside, returns to the nose; it is therefore lighter upon the weak spot.
On the Reduction of an Eye Prominence.
Chapter XX.
When an eye protrudes with its entirety, and there is no vision impairment, nor diminution; then it is necessary that you loosen the weak spot: then phlebotomize him: afterwards apply cupping glasses to the neck without scarification, but with suction.
Then place upon the eye a liniment which is made from acacia, and aloe, and frankincense, and sarcocolla. Then bind the eye from above upon a plaster with many powders.
And the manner of powders is: that you take soft cloths, many, and double every cloth from them over four; make many from them; then place them one upon another, according to the amount which the eye needs: then bind upon them with a hard cloth, a strong binding.
And repeat aspirations with a syringe without scarification.
Then remove the aspirated fluid, and let the eye be kept closed day and night.
But if the ligament again becomes softened, then it must be tightened much; then remove the ligature after a day and night, as we have said.
Therefore, if you see the eye has already returned to its former tunic, it is good; and if not, then repeat the plaster, and the poultices, and the ligature, and the aspirations until it is healed.
On the Incision of the Vitreous Tunic.
Chapter XXI.
When a rupture occurs in the vitreous tunic, then it protrudes and proceeds outside the eyelids like a seed of the vitreous, and spoils the appearance of man because of it, and there is a desire to excise it: then the operation on it is as follows, according to what I relate: and it is, that you introduce a needle into the root of the vitreous from the lower to the upper part.
Then introduce another needle in which there is a double thread from the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate; and let the first needle go according to its own position.
Then cut the place of the double thread, and tie with it the part of the vitreous around the needle; and tighten it very much.
Then withdraw the needle, and place wool steeped in albumen over the eye; and let him be, until the thread falls with the vitreous.
Then treat the eye with what strengthens it, until the wound is healed.
And sometimes the vitreous is constricted from every side with a circle made of cloth, until the eye adds great prominence.
Then perforate it with a fine trocar that reaches the depth of the eye, and let the albuminous moisture flow, and let the eye descend, and enter immediately; then tighten it until it is healed.
On the treatment of al-qonmti.
Chapter XXII.
This ailment which is called al-qonmti is nothing but a humor that collects in the eye, resembling descending water, and is not itself.
And the method of operating on it is to have the patient sit upon a prepared seat, or straight.
Then take his head with your hands on both sides and move it until you see the humor come down towards your eyes. Then fix it so that it does not descend, and clear the vision; and let the patient see things as he used to see; and if it does not descend below, you know that it is water.
But if the descent of the humor is not prepared as we said, then make the patient sit between your hands. Then take a fine spatula and with it make an incision above the corneal membrane a little at the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea in the crown until the humor emerges.
When it therefore emerges, then distill into the eye warm water in which you have mixed honey; or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey; then treat it with the remaining treatment until it is healed.
On the treatment of water that descends into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter XXIII.
We have already spoken of the kinds of water in the division, and what is suitable for piercing speech explaining and setting forth; then take that same thing according to health.
Then it is necessary for you to make the patient sit between your hands squarely, opposite the light near the sun; and bind his sound eye, and bind it tightly; then hold down the eyelid of his eye with your right hand if the eye in which there is water is the left eye; or with your left hand if the eye is the right.
Then take with your right hand an al-ma'ghazal if the eye is the left; or with your left hand if the eye is the right.
Then place the end of the almaga near the cornea for the width of a radius in the white of the eye apparent below the lesser lachrymal; then press the almaga with force and turn your hand with it until it enters into the albuginea of the eye; and you will feel that the almaga has now reached the empty space.
And it is necessary that the measure of the journey of the almaga to its depth be the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness; and this is the cornea of the eye. For you will see it in the pupil itself by the vision of the eye, on account of the clarity of the tunic of the cornea.
Then place the almaga up to the place where there is water. Then press it down below with juice one after another.
And if therefore the water descends immediately, then the sick man sees that upon which he opens his sight immediately, and the almaga in his eye.
Then rest a little while. And if therefore the water descends, then place it second beyond that by which the almaga comes out.
When therefore it is fixed and does not ascend; then draw out the almaga with ease; and you turn your hand little by little.
Then dissolve something of clear salt of gems in water; and wash the eye within it. Then place outside the whole eye a plug, or wool steeped in rose oil, and albuginea; and bind it with the sound eye.
We however, and those who are of our time, place upon it pounded cuminum with albuginea.
But if the almaga does not obey you to enter into the eye on account of its hardness because it is from men whose eyes are very hard; then it is necessary for you to take a speculum, which is called an Alberid, whose form is this:
Therefore perforate it only with this conjunctiva and not your whole hand into the hole; and there is nothing else to do except make a way to the almond-shaped place underneath.
Then introduce the almond as we have said.
And at the completion of your work, prepare for the sick man a well-made bedchamber in which he may sleep upon his back in a darkened room; and prohibit him from all motions and coughing; and give him food that soothes his nature; and let him not move his head to the right or left at all.
And let the ligature be according to its arrangement until the third day.
Then loosen it in that darkened room and test his sight; and have him see things. Then return the ligature until the seventh day.
And it is not fitting that he do this at the hour of healing or immediately after the incision; but rather, that others do it; because water ascends quickly through a forceful opening.
But if a hot swelling occurs; then it is fitting that you loosen the eye before the seventh day and correct it with that which stills the swelling until it is stilled; then release his sight, and place upon his face a covering by which his vision may be regulated under those days, with him being in that darkened room.
Then let him go out from the house gradually and frequent his own affairs.
And know that in surgery the student is not excused from sight often; then let him dare upon the operation.
And now indeed there has come to us a certain one of those who are from Al-Arayrakh, who said that a device was made in Al-Arayrakh which is perforated so that it sucks up water.
But truly I have not seen anyone in your land who has made this; nor have I read of it in any ancient book; and it is possible that it is new.
These are the forms of species from the ulcer, so that it may stand over him who does not know them.
Let them be made of bronze properly: and let their extremities be with this same subtlety triangular, and the extremity acute.
Chapter XXIV.
Concerning the treatment of flesh born on the nose.
Sometimes diverse added fleshes are born in the nose, from which there is something that resembles a scorpion of many feet; and from it is cancerous flesh, stony, of a dark color; and from it is that which is soft flesh, not of a dark color.
Therefore, in that which is soft flesh from these fleshes, not fraudulent nor cancerous, it is necessary for you to make the weak one sit between your hands opposite the sun, and open his nostrils, and throw a hook into those fleshes; then draw them outwards, and cut what you have grasped from them with a thin sharp scalpel on one side, until you know that all the flesh has now been removed.
And if anything remained from that which its excision is not possible: then shave it with one of the subtle instruments with ease, until nothing remains from it. But if blood dominates you, or a hot abscess occurs: then oppose it by what is necessary: or if it is from malignant abscesses, then hurry to cauterize it until the blood is cut off and all flesh is removed.
Then vinegar and water, or wine, should be thrown into the nose after the incision. But if the nose opens, and moisture proceeds from it up to the palate, then you know that it is now healthy.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that there is flesh born within it on the upper bones of the nose, to which the instrument did not reach with the incision.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to insert a linen thread which has some thickness, and make many knots in it; and place the distance of a finger, or less, between each knot: and have the weak one guide one end of the thread into his nose with a rod, or with whatever is possible for him after he has made it like a plowshare; and pull on his own odor until it reaches the back, and comes out over his throat.
And very often they do something like this dissection of a boy in schools; and it is an easy thing for whoever wants to do it.
Then place the two ends of the thread, one end that goes over the nose, and the other that remains in the nose. Then apply a carneal lock with the knots that are in the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh is already joined with the knots of the thread.
Then pull out the thread and put in the nose after washing away the blood a linen cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment; do this for three days, or more, until the ointment eats away all that remains from the flesh.
Then finally put a lead tube into the nose for several days until it heals.
But if it needs treatment that will dry it up, use that.
To make a nasal inhaler, with which oils and other medicines are distilled into the nose, make it from silver or bronze: it should be like a small lamp, open like a shell; and its passageway similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed tube, like a reed.
And the shell of the instrument for making a nasal inhaler should be full and open; it should have a handle at its end with which you hold it when heating oil or whatever you wish from juices and flowing things in it.
Chapter 25.
Very often a swelling arises at the end of the nose and it magnifies and increases with days until its appearance becomes ugly.
And because of that it is necessary to cut into it at the beginning of its appearance and eradicate all of it. Then place on top of the spot either a cautery or a burning medicine that takes its place.
Therefore, if the incision of this is delayed until it grows larger, then consider, if it is stony, hard, dark in color, and insensitive: then do not touch it with iron; for it is a cancerous ulcer.
For I have often seen those who suffered a felon and great misfortune came upon him who had it.
And if the felon is soft to the touch, not dark in color, and you see that incision is possible throughout its entirety, then evacuate the weak spot, and cut it without fear, without hesitation: and care for the place with that which dries and constricts, until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Six.
On the suture of the nose, lip, and ear.
Know that when a disruption of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, little benefit results from surgery except in certain individuals.
Therefore, when it happens to someone that they suffer one of these things, you must consider if it is a fresh wound with its own blood; and then join the two lips of the wound together with suture: then care for it until it heals.
And if the lips of the disruption have already been separated and each part has become healthy; then it is necessary that you scrape away all the skin from its surface until it bleeds. Then join the two lips together with suture and tighten them, and sprinkle dragon's blood and ground frankincense over it; and place a piece of diachylon plaster and some other consolidating plaster on top of the powders, and leave it bound for two or three days. Then unbind it and change the medicine; and leave it until the threads separate on their own. Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
The method of suturing is to join the disruption together either with needles as we have described in suturing the abdomen or to join the disruption with thread as I have taught you.
Chapter XXVII.
On the Extraction of Nodes from the Lips.
Many people indeed have hard swellings within their lips, similar to grains of herb, some smaller and some larger.
Therefore, you must turn back the lip and cut over each node, suspending it with a hook and cutting into it from all sides.
Then fill the place after the incision with powdered tragacanth until the bleeding stops.
Then wash it with vinegar and treat the area with it because of its astringent properties, until the wounds are healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the Incision of Flesh Born Over the Gum.
Very often flesh grows over the gum, which the ancients call an abuluss.
Therefore, you must either suspend it with a hook or hold it with forceps and cut it at its root, allowing the pus to flow or the blood.
Then place powdered tragacanth or other astringent, drying powders over the area.
But if the flesh returns after treatment, which often happens, then cut it a second time and cauterize it; for it will not return after cautery.
Chapter XXIX.
On the Scraping of Teeth with Iron.
Sometimes rough and foul crusts accumulate on the surfaces of teeth, both inside and outside, and between the gums, often becoming blackened, yellowish, and even greenish, until corruption from them spreads to the gums, making the teeth foul.
Therefore you must make the weak person sit between your hands and place their head in your lap, then with a file and rasp remove any crusts from the teeth where they appear to you like sand until nothing remains. Do the same for blackness, greenness, yellowness, and other discolorations until they are cleansed.
Therefore, if that which is in them from the beginning of reasoning is taken away, it is good; and if not, then iterate reason over them on another day, the second, and the third, until finally study reaches what you wish.
And know that a tooth needs razors of various shapes, many figures; according to how your operation is prepared; for which the razor with which the tooth is shaved from the lower part is different from the razor with which it is shaved between the teeth, according to other forms.
And let these forms of razors be prepared by you, which you see.
Chapter XXX.
On the Extraction of Painful Teeth.
You ought to cure the tooth from its pain with all your ingenuity, and delay in its eradication. For there is nothing which can supply its place when it is eradicated, because it is a lofty substance: until when there is no excuse for its eradication, then it ought to be eradicated when the infirm one is forced, so that it may be strengthened and certified by you as a painful tooth.
Very often pain deceives the infirm, and they think that it is in the tooth which is sound and eradicate it; then the pain does not recede until the infirm tooth is eradicated.
We have already seen this from the operation of phlebotomists.
Therefore, when the painful tooth itself is certified by you, it ought to be scarified around with a spatulum, in which there is some virtue, until the gum is loosened from every part: then move it yourself with your fingers or with subtle forceps at first gradually, until you shake it.
Then place large forceps there with a good placement and the head of the infirm one between your knees which you have already held well so that it does not move: then draw the tooth according to straightness so as not to break it.
But if it does not come out, then take some of those instruments and insert it under it from every part with ease, and try its movement as you did at first.
If, however, a tooth is perforated or corroded, then it is necessary that you fill the hole with cloth and tie it with the end of a fine wire so that it does not break during the time you constrict it with forceps.
And you must act very carefully with the scarring all around the gum on every side.
And guard your strength so that you do not break it, and a part of it remains, and it returns upon the weak one from that evil which is greater than his first pain.
And beware lest you do what ignorant phlebotomists do in their haste and boldness in its eradication, beyond what we have described to be administered.
Very often they cause great infirmities to befall men, which are more difficult to break, and all its roots or some of them remain, or that they extract it with some bones of the mandible: as we have testified many times.
Then wash after its eradication with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
If it should happen that blood flows from the places (for this often happens), then apply something from zegi and fill the place with it: and if not, cauterize it if zegi does not offer itself to you.
The shapes of the subtle forceps with which a tooth is moved first should have long shafts, a short handle, and be thick so that they do not bend when pressed upon a tooth: they should be like you see with large handles, until when you squeeze them they do not give way or bend; short shafts, and made of good iron or steel properly forged, straight-edged shafts: and on their extremities there should be teeth, some of which enter into others, and tighten with decent, strong constriction.
And sometimes the extremities are made like the shape of the mouth of a bird which is called a stork and they are strong constrictions.
Chapter Thirty-One.
On the removal of teeth, and the extraction of broken jaw bones.
When there remains something broken during the removal of a tooth, it is necessary to place a compress with butter on the spot for one or two days until the area softens; then introduce an elevator or forceps into it, whose ends are similar to the beak of a bird called a stork. This is the shape of these forceps.
Let their extremities be made like a file inside: or like an awl.
But if it does not obey you in order to exit with these forceps, then it is necessary that you carve above the root and detach all the flesh, and insert an instrument called a small lever, whose shape is this.
Let its extremity be short and slightly thick, and let it not be soaked so that it does not break.
Therefore, if the root comes out through that, it is good; and if not, you must pry with these other instruments whose shapes are these.
The shape of the first has a triangular extremity, in which there is a certain thickness.
The shape of the second has a slender triangular extremity.
And with the other instruments and tools that preceded for the reason of teeth.
You can also pry with this instrument which resembles a large hook of this shape, with a twisted triangular extremity, in which there is a certain thickness so that it does not break; and let it not be soaked.
And know that dental instruments are many; and similarly, the remaining instruments are not counted, and a skillful craftsman, subtle in his art, invents an instrument for himself according to what the operation and illnesses themselves indicate to him.
Because there are illnesses from which the ancients did not say an instrument, due to the diversity of their kinds.
If, however, the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are broken, or become putrid: then carefully examine it in its place with the instruments and forceps which I have mentioned for the extraction of roots, and aid it with a speculum, the form of which is as follows.
Let there be something of a moderate size in it, so that the mouth may be drawn tight or held with it, and does not escape and wander, until the bone comes out; and restore the place with suitable medicines for that purpose.
But if there is a little putrefaction in the bone, then scrape it clean of its putrefaction and care for it until it heals.
Chapter XXXII.
Of the Locking of Teeth Which Project Beyond Others.
When teeth protrude not according to their natural course, it makes the form ugly; and especially when this happens in women and girls, namely those who are marriageable.
Therefore it is necessary that you consider. For if a tooth is born after another tooth and does not fit, or its locking is not possible, nor its filing: then extract it; and if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, the form of which is as follows.
It is like a small beak, and is made of hardened iron, with a very sharp end.
And let your incision be made upon it over many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, and that another tooth may not be disturbed.
But if it projects exposed to filing: then file it with a file of hardened iron, the form of which is as follows.
Let it be entirely of iron, and its handle have very small points, just like the file with which needles are made; with which the tooth may be filed gradually over many days easily so that the tooth is not disturbed and falls out; then soften it at the end and extract it with certain rasps.
If it is dense, from which a part breaks off and injures the tongue, then it must be filed even until the roughness of that fracture is removed and it is made equal; and smoothed, so that it does not injure the tongue nor corrupt speech.
Chapter Thirty-Three.
On the Retention of Teeth with Gold Wires.
When the front teeth suffer a concussion and contusion from a blow or fall, and the infirm person cannot hold anything they eat on it lest it fall out: and you have treated them with astringent medications, but the treatment has not been successful; then there is an ingenious way to bind them with gold wire: for silver turns green and decays after a few days, but gold never changes.
And let the wire be medium in fineness and thickness according to the amount that fits between the teeth.
And the method of retention is as follows: you take the wire and insert a double length of it between two sound teeth; then you weave the two ends of the wire between the loose teeth, whether there is one or more, until you reach with the weaving up to a sound tooth on the other side. Then repeat the weaving back to the side where you started; and tighten your hand with subtlety and wisdom until it is not moved at all; and let your constriction where you bind the wire be at the roots of the teeth so that it does not come loose.
Then cut off the excess ends of the wire with forceps; and join both ends together and twist them with a gesture; and conceal them between a sound tooth and a loose tooth so that they do not injure the tongue; then let it remain tightened in this way.
But if it loosens or breaks, bind them again with another wire and it will remain thus for the whole time.
And this is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the retention of two sound teeth and two loose teeth, as you see.
And sometimes it happens that one or two teeth return to their places after a fall and are retained as we have described and remain; and this is not done except by a skillful, prudent, and experienced craftsman.
And sometimes one of the vaccine bones is adapted and made into the shape of a tooth, and it is placed in its place, from which the tooth is fortified and tightened as we said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV
Sometimes this ligament which occurs under the tongue is either natural, with which a man is born, or accidental, from a wound that has already healed.
And the operation on it is to open the mouth of the sick person in your lap and lift up his tongue; then cut that nervous ligament across its width until the tongue is freed from its restraint.
If there is something of hardness and nodulation in it, and if it is from the healing of a wound, then project a hook into it and pierce it across its width until you strike the ligament and loosen the nodulation.
And be careful that there is no fissure deep in the flesh, and that you do not cut into an artery there, lest blood flow occur.
Then wash the area of the incision with rose water or vinegar, or cold water.
Then place a linen ligature under the tongue, which the sick person should hold in his mouth every night so that it does not heal back together again.
But if bleeding occurs, then put powdered alum on the area. But if blood overcomes you, then cauterize the area with a lenticular cautery which is suitable for it; then care for it as with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter Thirty-Five
Sometimes an abscess occurs under the tongue resembling a small frog, preventing the tongue from its natural function; and perhaps it grows so large that it fills the mouth.
The operation on it is to open the sick person's mouth in front of the sun and consider the abscess.
Therefore, if you see it to be of a dark or black color, hard, and one to which the sick person does not feel sensation: then do not touch it, for it is cancer.
But if it inclines toward whiteness, and there is moisture in it, then thrust a hook into it, and cut it with a fine scalpel, and free it from every part. And if blood overcomes you during your operation, then place ground zedoary upon it until the bleeding stops; then return to your operation until you extract it with all its contents.
Then gargle it with vinegar and salt; and care for it with the remaining treatment suitable for it until it is healed.
Concerning the Treatment of an Abscess of Two Tonsils.
Chapter Thirty-Six.
Sometimes there occur between the throat glands, which are called almonds,  that protrude outward; and they are called two tonsils: when you treat these as we have said in division, and they do not heal, then consider.
Therefore if it is an abscess that is hard, dark in color, with little sensation: then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is reddish in color, and its root is thick: then do not touch it even with iron, fearing a flow of blood, but rather let it mature. And then either pierce it or it will burst on its own.
And if it is white in color, round, and has a slender root: then you must cut into it.
And the operation on it is that before its operation you should consider if the abscess has become quiet, and its heat completely subsided, or whether it diminishes somewhat; then make the sick person sit in front of the sun, and let their head be in your lap; open their mouth, and let a servant take it between his hands and press the tongue down with an instrument, which is shaped as follows.
Let it be made of silver, or of bronze, which is as fine as a knife.
Therefore when you press with it the tongue, and an abscess is shown to you, and your sight falls upon it: then take a hook, and fix it in the amygdala, and draw it forth externally as much as you are able, besides which you draw with it something from the tunics.
Then incise it with an instrument, of which this is the following form. It is assimilated to forceps: nevertheless the extremities of it are curved, so that the opening of each one of them is directed into the other acutely: whence care should be taken that it is made of tempered iron, or silver imbued with brass.
But if this instrument is not present, then incise it with a scalpel, of which this is the form. Let it be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And after you have incised one amygdala, incise the other according to this same kind of incision.
Then after the incision let the patient gargle with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
But if there should happen to him a flow of blood, let him gargle with water in which have been boiled the husks of pomegranates: or myrtle leaves, and such like from astringents, until the flow of blood is cut off: then care for it, until it heals.
And sometimes there arise in the throat other abscesses, besides the two amygdalae. Therefore incise them according to what I said in the incision of the two amygdalae equally.
And I myself indeed have already treated a woman from an abscess, which had arisen between her throat, which was drawing it to a burning, few senses, which already almost closed the throat: and the woman was breathing from a narrow passage, and already prohibited her eating, and drinking water: and already she had arrived at death, if it had remained one day, or two days.
And the swelling had risen so high that it had sent forth two branches, until they extended beyond the two nostrils.
Therefore I hastened and fixed a hook into one of them. Then I drew it out, and a large portion was extracted from it.
Then I cut it off where it was grasped from the nostril.
Then I did the same to that which protruded from the other nostril.
Then I opened her mouth and pressed down her tongue; and afterward I fixed a hook into the swelling itself; then I cut off a portion from it, and only a little blood flowed from it; therefore the woman's throat was healed, and she immediately began to drink water, and then took food.
Therefore I did not cease to cut from that swelling many times over a long period; and the swelling would succeed in the place where I had cut, until it was prolonged excessively and came out with it.
I then devised and cauterized the swelling between her throat.
Therefore it stopped from growing; then I departed, and did not know what God did with her after me.
On the Incision of a Swelling of the Palate.
Chapter Thirty-Seven.
When phlegm descends to the palate and swells up and is long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is thick and round in the lower part, then it is called a vault.
When it is treated with what we have said in the division and the treatment does not succeed; and you see that the swelling has become quiet and thin from it, then it is necessary to cut into it.
And that which is round and gathered from it, and does not have length, and is bloody or tawny colored or black, and has no sensation; then it is necessary to make an incision into it. For there is fear concerning the weak one.
Therefore it is necessary that when you see it according to the manner I have said from its whiteness and length, you should make the weak person sit before the sun, and press their tongue with the instrument of which I have previously spoken; then fix a hook in the uvula and draw it downwards; and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned for cutting the two tonsils.
And it is necessary that you not cut from it except that which is added beyond the natural term without addition.
For if you cut from it more, you will injure the voice and speech.
Then after the incision, use that which we have narrated in the incision of the two tonsils; and care for it until it heals.
But if the weak person is frightened by the incision, then it is necessary that you use skill in cauterizing it without fear and dread.
And the method of cauterization in it is not except with sharp water; and it is, that you place the head of the weak person in your lap. Then press their tongue with the instrument which we have mentioned. Then take from the water which I have told you in the chapter on cauterization and mix it with a coal not extinguished, and make it neither thick nor thin, and fill from it the concavity of this instrument, of which this is the shape.
Let the extremity in which medicine is placed have a concavity, like the concavity of a radius cochlea.
And place the instrument with medicine on the uvula itself; and let the weak person lie on their side so that saliva runs from their mouth out of the inner medicine, so that nothing descends from it to their throat and harms them.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And you from the first place it on the uvula for half an hour, until you see it already blackened and the bite of the medicine subdued.
And if you wish to take a piece of cotton and wrap it over the end of the radius, and infuse the cotton with medicine, and introduce the radius with the cotton into the cannula from above, until the cotton adheres onto the tip.
Do that many times, until you achieve what you desire concerning the cauterization of the vein. Then let it alone; for it will dry up and fall off after three days or four.
And if you wish to iterate the medicine, repeat it; and after the cauterization wash around the vein with cotton soaked in butter, and cleanse it of what is around it from the medicine; and bathe it with cold water.
And let it be treated externally with embrocations, and internally with gargles, until it is healed.
Therefore this kind of treatment is healthier than incision and further from danger.
And sometimes a vein is also treated with something more subtle than cautery and incision; for it is treated with fumigation, in this manner. Take calamus, and hyssop, and origanum, and rue, and sage, and chamomile, and abrotanum, and things like them from herbs; and gather all these together, or some of them in a pot, and submerge them with vinegar, and let them boil; and the pot should be plastered well with clay; and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot, above which an instrument concave in shape is placed.
Let it be made of silver or bronze; and insert the extremity, in which there is a pomegranate, into the mouth of the sick person, until the vapor rises to the vein above the cannula, until the vein becomes very dark.
Then repeat it over it many times, until it dries up.
And be careful not to do this treatment at the beginning of the arrival of an abscess. For it usually adds to the abscess; and it is not right for you to do this unless at the decline of its heat.
If you do not have this instrument present, then take a tube and put bark on the end of it so that the mouth of the sick person is not burned; for the bark prevents vapor from burning the mouth; and this is good healing with safety.
On the Extraction of Thorns and Bones from the Throat.
Chapter Thirty-Eight.
Very often a bone or a fishbone, or something else adheres in the throat.
Therefore you must extract what is apparent from them upon which vision falls after you press the tongue with an instrument toward the sun, and it is declared to you what is in the throat.
And what does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, you must make the sick person vomit before the food is digested in the stomach. For perhaps the attached thing will go out through vomiting.
Or let the sick person swallow a piece of turnip or a lettuce root, or swallow a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of dried gentle sea sponge and tie it with thread, then swallow it. When it reaches the place where the spines or bone are, and they are extracted, then they come out.
But if it does not come out with what we have said, then use an instrument of lead according to this form.
Let it be somewhat thicker than a spoke and let there be a curve at the end of it, so that it may enter his throat easily; and let him have his head elevated upward.
And be careful of touching his epiglottis so that coughing does not happen to him and he drives out the bone or spine with it, or let the doctor introduce it with his own hand.
But for the sick person to introduce it is better: because of his knowledge of the location of the attached thing; and he drives it down or pulls his hand upward with the instrument, all of it according to the quantity that is prepared for him until it comes out.
On the Extraction of a Leech.
Chapter XXXIX.
When a leech is treated with what I have said in the division on healing with medicines and it does not detach, then consider in the throat of the sick person in front of the sun, or by the sun after you press its tongue with an instrument which I have described to you.
If therefore your sight falls upon the leech, extract it with a small hook, or with delicate forceps discreetly.
And if this is not possible with them: then take a concave cannula and insert it into the throat of the sick person up to near the throat; then insert iron heated with fire into the concavity of the cannula. Do this many times, and let the sick person abstain from all water for a whole day.
Then let him take a goblet full of cold water and open his mouth into it; and moisten his mouth with it and not swallow anything from it; and stir the water with his hand one hour after another. For the leech immediately, when it feels the water, falls off.
But if it does not depart with what we have described, then fumigate the sick person with bedbugs, or with asafoetida with an instrument which I have described in the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this many times, for it will fall off.
And the manner of operation in fumigation is to take a pot in which there are live prunes with fire; and let the pot be covered with a lid, in the middle of which there is a hole; and let the extremity of the instrument be placed into that hole.
Then project the fumigation and let the sick person place his mouth at the extremity of the cannula and close his mouth so that the fumigation does not escape until you know that the fumigation has already reached the leech. For the leech will immediately fall off.
If it does not fall out, then repeat the fumigation many times.
And let the sick person endure thirst, and eat salt things, and garlic, and let him not drink water.
Therefore it is necessary that he goes out with this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the leech is extracted from the throat when it falls upon it by sight.
It is similar to forceps, as you see: except that it has this curvature which is inserted into the throat. And the extremity of it is similar to the beak of a bird which is called a stork, in which there is roughness like a file: when it grasps something, it does not release it at all.
Concerning the opening of abscesses, and their incision, and care in general.
Chapter 40.
There are many kinds of abscesses, of many ways, according to what comes to the recollection of them, namely one, and one in this book: and they are different in their perforation, and incision of themselves in two ways.
One of which is from the kind of abscess itself, and that because it comprises from humidities.
And the second way is on account of the places, in which it happens in the body.
Because an abscess happening in the head is different from an abscess happening in the anus: and an abscess happening in a fleshy place is different from an abscess happening in joints: and to each of them there is a judgment of its own from the operation.
And from abscesses there are which ought not to be perforated except after the maturation of blood in them, and its completion; and from them there are which ought to be perforated while they are raw, and do not mature according to completion.
Such as abscesses which are near joints.
Because an abscess when it happens near a joint, and is prolonged to be its own, until it putrefies what is in its circumference perhaps the ligaments, or nerves of that joint are corrupted: therefore there is a cause for the closer contraction of that member.
Either there is an abscess at a major limb; for if you delay its incision until it matures, it will harm either that limb or the main limb through it.
Or it is near the anus, therefore perforate it while immature; and it is not necessary to perforate an abscess crude, of incomplete digestion, except that which is near the anus, lest it putrefy deeply, and extend to the interior of the anus, and a fistula be formed, or a termination thereof which does not heal.
You ought to know the hour of incision of an abscess, which is matured according to completeness; and it is at sedation of pain, recession of fever, and diminution of redness, and throbbing, and sharpness of the head of the abscess; and the remaining signs.
And it is necessary that you make the same incision in the lower part of the abscess, and of more vehement eminency; and let the incision be wading in length according to the body, if the abscesses are in parts of the hands and feet, and places of muscles, and chords, and nerves, and arteries, and finally in all equal places where there is no reflection.
But in those which are reflected, wade with the incision according to that limb.
But when an abscess is in fleshy places; then it is better that you dismiss its incision until its digestion is confirmed, as we said according to completeness.
For if you perforate it before that, the course of the virus is prolonged from it, and there is much filth and foulness, and perhaps its lips will become hardened, and its depth.
And certain abscesses are perforated according to the breadth of the body according to necessity; or according to that in which the limb needs.
And it is necessary that you administer a small incision in small abscesses, and a large incision in large abscesses; or many sections through similarity to the magnitude of the abscess.
And they are from abscesses, in which the skin must be concave; and it should be cut when it has become like cloth, and has been made at the end, which is already dead: just as happens in many, such as boils and buboes.
And of these are those which are cut with a section having three angles. And of these is one, from which it is cut like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Such as an abscess of the groin.
And of these are those in which a round section and a lunar section are administered; and similar to them from sections.
But that which has no head, such as mild superficial abscesses, must be perforated with a superficial perforation or only flat.
And when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus and you perforate it, do not hurry and draw out all the pus in that hour; rather, draw out a part of it. Then close the abscess until another day. Then again draw out something of the pus.
Do this many times according to gradation, until it comes out; especially if the patient is weak in strength, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old man who has grown weak; for indeed the animal spirit is often resolved from the animal with the outflow of pus; and perhaps the sick person dies, and you do not perceive it.
Therefore beware of this chapter with great caution.
And after you have perforated these abscesses, it is necessary that you wash the wound; and consider. Therefore if the wound of the abscess is small, or it is a flat section, then apply a bandage from linen or old cotton. And if the abscess is large and there are many fissures of the perforation, it is necessary then to insert a bandage into every fissure until they reach each other.
And if in an abscess you have cut off a part of the skin, or have scooped it out around its circumference: then it is necessary that you fill it with old lint, or as when cloth is woven, or shaved with flax down without moisture; and bind it up until the third day.
Then loosen it, and care for it with what is necessary from ointment, until it heals.
But if bleeding should happen during your operation, then administer cold water and vinegar, after a cloth has been soaked in them; and place it upon the place of the bleeding many times.
But if the bleeding should persist, then it is necessary that you administer a regimen and care, and powders which I have described in many places of this book of ours, and by division.
But if it is in the time of winter, and the place of the abscess is of many nerves: then it is necessary that you pour warm broth with wine and oil; and place them upon the places.
And if it should be in summer, and the places are fleshy: then it is necessary that you place broth soaked in water and oil, or in wine and oil, and all of it cold. Until when it will be the third day, as we said, then it is necessary that you loosen the abscess, and wash it out, and administer in its care what suits it, until it heals.
This, therefore, is what is necessary from knowledge of treatment of abscesses universally.
According to the way of distinction, I have now spoken of every abscess, how its way to cure is taken up individually.
Chapter 41.
Concerning the incision of abscesses which occur in the skin of the head.
Small abscesses occur in the skin of the head, and they are of a species of nodules, which contain sheaths, which are sacs to them: as if they themselves were like pouches of a hen.
And there are many kinds of them.
Among them are some that are fatty; and among them are some that contain moisture like mud; and among them are some that contain moisture like curdled milk and pulps; and those similar to them; and among them are some that are hard and stony.
And in the section of all of them, and their extraction, there is no fear, as long as the artery does not make resistance at their section.
And the operation in their section is that you try them with an instrument, whose form comes after this, which is called an Intromissum, until you know what it contains.
For if it is that which contains moisture, then dry it by a section according to its length with a superficial section, according to this form.
And begin with a section from line b to line g.  Therefore when the moisture is evacuated, then the skin kistin which contains it, and do not let anything remain within it.
For very often it returns if anything remains within it.
Then immerse the stump in Egyptian ointment if it is present; and if not, in water and salt; and fill the wound with it, and leave it until another day. For it will corrode what remained from the kist.
Then repeat upon the stump with a second, and third Egyptian ointment, and if it does not yield to that, until you are confident that nothing remained from the kist, then care for the wound with ointment until it heals.
But if the abscess contains a fatty node, then dry it according to this form, with a section having the form of a cross; and project hooks between the two lips of the section, and skin it from every side; and exert your strength in extracting the tunic which contains it.
But if the artery makes resistance to you, then do what I will tell you afterward.
And do likewise for an abscess, if it is stony, from incision and treatment the same as we have said.
And incision over a stony abscess is easier because there is little blood and moisture. And sometimes there are certain of these abscesses which are in the head in some people with which there is no moisture at all.
Which is because I cut into an abscess on the head of a young woman and found the abscess like a solid and hard stone, rough and white, which could not be broken; and if one should strike it with a projectil it would wound the person.
But in other abscesses occurring in the head, besides these abscesses which occur in the heads of infants and at the roots of ears, the incision of all of them should be a superficial incision.
Or make a puncture of them always from their lower part so that the course of blood is relieved downwards.
Then treat it with what suits them from its treatment.
Concerning the incision of strangles in the neck.
Chapter 42.
Very often these abscesses occur in the neck and under the armpits and groins; and sometimes they occur in the rest of the body.
And those that occur from them in the neck are one and many and they are generated from each other; and every strangles from them is within its own tunic as it is in nodes and abscesses of the head as we have described.
And there are many kinds of these strangles. For some of them are stony and some contain moisture and some are malignant, which do not obey treatment.
Therefore in that one which you see from them of good disposition to the touch, of which it is clear that it is close to the color of the skin and moves to every part, and is not joined with the nerves of the neck, nor the gland, nor the artery and is not deep: it is necessary that you cut it with a superficial incision from the upper part to the lower part of the body from line b. to line g. and flay it from all sides; and extend two lips of skin with a hook or hooks if needed as we said in abscesses of the head, and extract it gradually.
And it is a precaution, that a vein or nerve not be cut.
And let the knife be not very sharp, so that it does not add to your hand with the incision, nor agitate the sick person, and you may cut what is not necessary.
But if you cut a vein or artery, or it prevents you from the operation, then put into the wound a boiled herb, or certain powders that staunch blood, and constrict the wound, and let it be until the sharpness of the inflammation subsides, and the wound softens: or it begins to become putrid.
For blood is staunched by a tunic. Return therefore to your operation until you complete it.
Then inquire with your index finger if anything remains from the little styptics or others: therefore cut them and clean them.
But if there is in the root of a stypsis a large vein: then it is necessary that you not cut that stypsis from its root: but rather that you tie it with a strong doubled thread, and let it be until it falls off by itself without harm.
Then fill the wound with old lint, which you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment. Then take care of it.
But if the whole stypsis is cut, then it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound: and sew it immediately after you see that there is no surplus remaining at all.
But if you see that there is a surplus remaining because of the size of the stypsis, then it is necessary that you intend to cut its root and extract it: and apply the suture as we have said.
And that which contains moisture from the styptics, pierce it with a superficial perforation so that the place of its maturity appears to you: and place the perforation from what follows below the body as we have said.
Then administer after the perforation linen with ointment and things similar to them so that it corrodes what remains from the corruption until when you see that the wound is already cleansed: then take care of it with a generative ointment of flesh until it heals.
Chapter XLIII.
On the incision of the epiglottis affected by an abscess within the throat.
The ancients spoke of this incision in the epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it; and this is the writing of their words.
But in those who have fluxion, the epiglottis must be incised when there is no benefit from that; because all the veins and lungs are weak.
But in those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or throat, or both tonsils, when there is no pain in the canal, the epiglottis must be incised to avoid the destruction which results from premonition.
Therefore, when we wish to do this, we must cut the epiglottis below three or four circles of the epiglottis, with a small incision in width, in that which is between the two circles by an amount that makes the incision in the flesh, not in the cartilage; and indeed this place is suitable for the incision because it is private to flesh, and blood vessels are far from it.
But if the physician is timid, then he must extend the skin of the throat with a hook. Then let him pierce the skin until he reaches the canal; divert the blood vessels if he sees anything from them.
Then let him cut the flesh as we have described; and it is indicated above the incision of the canal by phlegm which issues from it, with what is broken up, and cessation of voice.
And leave the wound open for a time.
Therefore when the hour is removed in which premonition is feared, join the two lips of the skin wound and sew it alone without cartilage.
Then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow until it heals.
Says Albucasis. The sum of this discourse which we have narrated is not exposition except when they see that some of these apostemata already has suppurated the throat of the sick person and he is raised up on the point of death and desires to intercept his breaths: they go to cutting the epiglottis so that the sick person may breathe upon the place of the wound with a certain respiration and be saved from death; and for this reason they ordered to leave the wound open until the malice of the sickness is consumed and it is the malice of this three days and as if itself: then therefore they ordered to sew the wound and to heal it until it heals.
And that which I myself saw was that a certain handmaid took a knife and sent it into her throat and it fell upon a part of the pulmonary canal.
And I was called to her healing and I found her moaning like is the moan of a dead person.
I therefore examined from the wound and I found little blood which had issued from the wound. I was therefore perplexed because she had not cut a vein nor her gullet and wind was coming out from the wound.
I therefore hastened and sewed up her wound and healed it until it was well and nothing happened to the handmaid except hoarseness in her voice and she returned after days to a better disposition of hers.
From this therefore I say that there is no fear in the cutting of the epiglottis.
Concerning the cutting of a hernia of the throat.
Chapter Forty-Four.
This swelling called a hernia of the throat is a large swelling according to the color of the body and it is much in women.
And it is according to two ways either it is natural or accidental.
In the natural there is certainly no craft.
The accidental however is according to two ways of which one is similar to fatty nodes. Another method is similar to an abscess which occurs from tying off an artery. And there is fear within it, and it is not fitting that presumption be made against it with iron except in that which is small; and you test it, and investigate it with an Intromisso. If therefore you find it similar to a fat knot, and it is not suspended with any veins: then cut it off, as knots are cut; and extract it with that which it contains from the cyst, if it is in a cyst: and if not, then scrutinize its entirety. Then care for the place with what is fitting from healing, until it heals.
Chapter Forty-Five.
On the Section of Different Kinds of Knots.
There are many kinds of knots, and I have already said all their kinds in the division; and it is fitting that I tell here the difference between a Knot and an Excrescence: since there is a doubt-causing one.
I say therefore that when there is an Excrescence there is heat, and fever, and violent pains until the boiling of superfluity is calmed, and putrefaction is completed; then indeed fever and heat subside.
But with a Knot there is no heat, nor fever, nor pain; and they contain them in cysts sifachin, which are their own sac, and it is according to the color of the body; and its beginning is like a pea, and it becomes like a date-stone, larger and smaller.
And they are according to two kinds: either fatty or containing moisture. And the colors of moisture are many, according to what I said in the division.
Therefore it is fitting that when you come to the healing of a Knot, that you experiment on it, and inquire into it first with an instrument called an Intromisso, according to how its form will come in the chapter which follows this.
And the method of inquiry for abscesses, and all Knots, is to take this instrument, and insert it into the moister place which you find in the abscess; and you revolve your fingers with it gradually, until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the skin. Then place your last finger according to the measurement of the size of the abscess.
Then extract the intrument and consider that which comes out in its wake.
Therefore if flowing moisture emerges, whatever its color may be: then dry it with a superficial incision, as I have said in other abscesses.
And if moisture does not emerge in the wake of the instrument, then know that it is thick: therefore dry it above with an incision in the shape of a cross, according to this form as I have taught you: and suspend it with hooks, and flay the skin from every part with ease: and keep the plaster if you are able upon it so that you extract it whole with its knot.
But if the cyst ruptures during the operation and it is not possible to extract it whole, for this often happens, then extract it in pieces until nothing remains of it.
For if a little or a lot remains of it, the knot will return for the most part.
And if it overcomes you and a little remains from it: then fill the wound upon completion with certain corrosive and sharp powders: and constrict the wound and place above it what sits upon the abscess hot, and care for it with the remaining treatment until it is healed.
Therefore if the knot is large, then sew its two lips together, and care for it as it heals.
But if there is a vein contrary to you, pulsatile or not pulsatile: then hurry and fill the place with finely ground triturated matter, and let it remain constricted for two or three days until the wound putrefies and the boiling of the blood subsides: then return to incise what remains from the knot.
Chapter Forty-Six.
Concerning external instruments for incision and perforation.
Among them are the forms of instruments, and they are of three kinds.
For from them is a great one, and from them is a medium one, and from them is a small one.
Let them be made of well-tempered iron with square ends, so that they hasten entry into the abscess.
And these are the forms of Instruments, and namely, piercing; and one of them is called a bistoury, that is, a piercer; and they are of three kinds.
For from them is a great one, a medium one, and a small one.
They are suited to investigate abscesses through them, and outlets, and fistulas, and buboes from what is between bones.
And others are made round, smooth, gentle, like large needles with which sutures are taken, namely from brass, or bronze, or iron, or silver.
And the better ones of them are those made from brass.
And Instruments are also made of black lead, which are suitable so that fistulas may be investigated through them, with which there are reflections due to their concavity, so that they may be reflected gently with those reflections.
And they are again of three kinds. For from them are long ones, from them medium ones, and from them short ones, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and its tightness.
The form of Hooks, and they are of many kinds.
For from them are simple ones, namely those which have a single curve; and they are of three kinds as you see, Large, Medium, and Small.
And from them are blind Hooks; and they are of three kinds.
And from them are Hooks having two curves, and they are of three kinds; and from them are Hooks having three curves, and they are of three kinds; and all these are necessary in their place.
And these are the forms of Knives, with which nodes and abscesses are cut and pared; and they are of three kinds: for from them is a great one, a medium one, and a small one.
Their extremities by which the section is made are sharp, other extremities are not sharp; and they are not put thus, except so that with them refreshment may be made in the excision of nodes at fear of incision of a vein or nerve; and that he who is ill may be healed by them, and find a little tranquility from the burning which he finds in the excision of an abscess.
They are made of metal, and are similar to a Radiator, with which alcohol is made; and at the wide end there is a hidden Spatula point: and it runs to the inside, and outside when you wish, as you see.
The shape of the spatulas which are hidden between the fingers at the excision of abscesses: and the sick do not perceive them: and they are of three kinds, large, medium, and small.
Shapes of Suction Cups with which the flow of blood is cut off; and they are of three kinds, large, medium, and small.
Let them be made of metal or brass, round, a little in length as you see; and let them be delicate.
And it is necessary that these kinds of Suction Cups be large and small with you so that you may cut off blood quickly when needed and then when medicine is not present for you.
However, do not use them in the cutting off of blood in every place of the body, and do not use them except in fleshy places: such as the calves of the leg, and the hip, and the calves of the arms, and the breasts, and the belly, and the groin, and similar ones, from fleshy calves, moist.
And sometimes other small instruments are made from them similar to pistachio shells according to their shape; with which blood is cut off when it flows from the place of phlebotomy or at the incision of a vein or artery: and sometimes they are made round according to this shape.
Chapter XLVII.
On the treatment of the mammary glands of men which resemble those of women.
Sometimes the nipples of certain men swell up during sleep, until they resemble women's breasts, and they remain foul abscesses.
He who wishes to get rid of this should make a crescent-shaped incision above the nipples, from line b to line g. Then he should remove all the skin and fat. Afterwards fill the wound with flesh-producing medicine. Then bring together the two lips of the wound with sutures and care for it until it heals.
But if the nipple hangs down and softens because of its size, as happens to women: then it is necessary to make two incisions on its upper sides, similar in shape to a crescent moon, each contained with the other at the ends of both, until there is a larger line containing the smaller one, according to this form from line b. to line g. Afterwards remove the skin which is between the two lips and take away the fat, and apply what we said about sutures and powders, which are necessary for healing, until it heals.
But if you cannot complete the incision as needed because of the patient's restlessness or the flow of blood: then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in a corrosive ointment and leave it until it corrodes what remains of the fat. Then care for it until it heals.
On the perforation of an abscess which occurs under the nipple.
Chapter XLVIII.
These abscesses which occur under the nipple are of a hard kind like a Strophulus, which contain cysts and those which contain moisture.
Those therefore which are of the kind that contain moisture, should be cut with a crescent-shaped incision, according to this form, from line b to line g. When all that is in the abscess has been evacuated as pus, then fill it with old cotton and leave it until the next day.
Then let the shirt be removed, and let it be treated with a suitable ointment until it is healed.
But if the abscess is of the type of knotty Strophulus, then cut it above it, as we said in the section on Strophulus equally.
But if the wound extends so as to discharge pus, then apply a cautery to it, according to what we have said before.
Chapter XLIX.
On the section of an abscess which occurs due to Artery and Vein.
When an artery is ruptured and the skin above it becomes consolidated, then an abscess often occurs from this; and similarly it happens with a vein, so that an abscess and swelling occur in it.
And the signs by which it is known that an abscess and swelling are due to an artery and vein are: because when the abscess is due to an artery, it is long, gathered deep in the body; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel as if there is a rasping sound.
And that which is due to a vein is round, manifest on the body.
And the section of this abscess is an error and especially that which is under the armpits and groins and neck and in many places on the body; and it is very large. Therefore, its treatment must be divided with iron, and what is also from them in the extremities, or in the head, must be divided.
Therefore, on that which is from them by inflation of the orifice of the artery, make a section in the skin lengthwise. Then open the section with hooks, then the artery; and free it from its tunics until it is exposed.
Then insert a needle under it and make it penetrate up to the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then puncture the place which is between the two ligaments with a trocar, until all the blood contained within it comes out, and the abscess is resolved.
Then apply a treatment that produces pus, until the ligaments fall away; afterwards treat it with suitable ointments, until it heals.
But if the abscess is due to a vein being cut, then you must hold with your hand as much of the abscess with the skin as possible. Then insert a needle under the place which you held with your hand and make it penetrate; and let there be a double thread in it until you draw it out from the other side. Then tie with it the abscess with a good ligament; according to what I told you in the vein ligament, from two parts with two ends of thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then insert another needle with another thread under the whole abscess at the puncture; press and tighten your threads in four places.
Then cut the abscess in its middle, until what is inside it comes out; then cut away the excess skin and release what was tied from it.
Then place upon it a poultice which you have soaked in wine and oil. Then apply treatment, made with licorice and ointments until it heals.
Chapter I.
Concerning an abscess which occurs from the twisting of nerves.
Just as an abscess occurs in arteries and veins, similarly an abscess occurs in nerves; which happens to them through a blow or from excessive labor and similar causes; and it most often occurs in those places where the limbs join, such as the heel, and in every place where the joints are moved, and the abscess is severe.
Its color resembles the rest of the body, and it is in many positions without pain; and when it is squeezed with force, a weak sensation similar to numbness is felt within it.
And it is not a gathered abscess deep within the body, but rather under the skin, and itself moves to every part, and does not go forward, nor before, nor backward to the rear.
Therefore, that which is from them in the joints should not be invaded with iron. For perhaps a contraction may occur.
But that which is from them in the head or forehead, cut the skin with a scalpel. And if therefore it is a small abscess, then hold it with forceps and cut it from the root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook and flay it: then remove it and gather the wound with sutures: and tend to it until it heals.
Chapter LI.
Concerning the incision of an abscess which occurs in the abdomen.
It happens to some men many times in their bellies and in the other parts of their bodies, boils which are called fungal, by similarity to fungi.
The root of which is subtle, and the head is thick, and their lips are inverted. And there are some small ones from them, and there are some that greatly enlarge.
And I myself have indeed already seen a man, and in his belly were two boils which were more like fungi than anything else: there was no difference between them, white, of a small root, and their lips were inverted, and they split open, and moisture always flowed from them.
Therefore I cut into them and found in the weight of one almost ten and eight ounces and in the other almost six ounces. And the operation in their incision is that you consider then if he is weak and moist and the color of the boil is white, moist, of a delicate root: then cut it with a broad scalpel, and have a cautery present with you in the fire.
For very often much blood is expelled at its incision; therefore hasten and if blood overcomes you, then cauterize it.
But if you see a weak and timid person from the incision with a knife, then take a thread made of lead properly, and bind it with that thread: whose method is what we said, and let him go for two days.
Then add lead to the ligature. Therefore do not cease binding the lead whenever it presses into the wound, until it is cut off and falls by itself without labor.
But if the wart has a thick root, then there is some fear and dread in its incision; especially because it is on the abdomen.
However it is possible to cut into half of it. Then cauterize it so that it does not return.
Then care for it until the wound heals.
And beware that you do not presume to cut into a wart which is of a dark color, with little sensation, and an ugly appearance; for it is indeed a cancerous abscess; and I will come with the remembrance of Cancer after this.
Chapter Fifty-Two.
On the care of the prominence of the navel.
The prominence of the navel arises from many causes. Or from fissures of the omentum, which is over the abdomen; and there issues forth fat, or intestine, according to what happens in other ruptures. Or from blood flowing from a vein, or an artery, according to what has been said previously. Or from wind compressed within it.
But if it is due to a fissure of the omentum and the issuing forth of fat; then its color resembles the color of the body; and it is soft, without pain; and appears in various locations. And if it is due to the protrusion of intestine, then its location is, along with what we have described, of a more violent diversity. When therefore you press it with your fingers, it is concealed; then it returns, and perhaps there is a sound with it; and it magnifies greatly at the entrance of the bath, and a vehement labor.
But if it is on account of humidity, it is soft, then it is not concealed when you press it with your hand, nor does it become constricted, nor is anything added.
But if it is on account of blood, then with these signs an abscess appears tending to blackness from the clefts.
But if it is on account of flesh that has formed, then the abscess is heavy, thick, hard, and it is fixed according to a single quantity.
But if it is on account of windiness, then its touch is soft.
And the procedure in that case is, that you then consider whether the prominence of the navel is on account of blood from an Artery or Vein, or windiness; then it is necessary that you forbid its treatment. For there is fear and dread, as I taught you in the chapter in which I said abscesses are on account of artery and vein.
But if the prominence of the navel is on account of intestine or membrane; then it is necessary that you direct the sick person to hold his breath and stand upright extended. Then mark with sealing wax all around the circumference of the navel. Then direct him to lie down between your hands on his back. Then encircle with a broad spatula around the navel upon the place which you marked with sealing wax. Then extend the middle of the abscess upward with a large hook. Then tie it around firmly with thread or a cord made of silk with a strong binding; and let the knot of the ligament be away from the constriction.
Then open the extended middle of the abscess above the ligature. If then you find it already caught by a ligament: then extract the alenxotati, and insert the index finger into it, and push the intestine towards the interior of the abdomen; and if you find a zirbum, then take it up with a hook, and cut away its excess.
But if it is an artery or vein to the contrary, then bind it very much. Then return to your operation. And take two needles, and insert into them two strong threads; and insert the two needles into the circumference which you made around the apostema in the manner of a cross, which you make penetrate.
Then constrict the apostema in four places over the needles; and if you wish, remove the needles, and leave the place until the extended flesh rots; and falls off by itself: or cut it when it softens and decays.
Then treat it with what is necessary from ointments, until it heals.
But if the eminence of the umbilicus is from fleshous growth in it, or from moisture: then it is necessary that you make concave apostemas, as we have said. And draw out the blood or moisture which you find in it.
Then treat it with what strengthens the place.
Chapter Fifty-Three.
Concerning the Care of CANCER.
We have already spoken in the division of the species of Cancer, and how is the way to its cure with medicines; and we warned against it when curing it with iron, so as not to ulcerate it: and we spoke about Cancer generated in the womb, and cautioned against its treatment.
And the ancients said that sometimes Cancer is in a place where it is possible to eradicate it; such as Cancer which is in the breasts, or in the thigh, and those similar to them, from the limbs located for extracting all of it; especially when it is beginning and small.
When it is old and large, you should not approach it closely.
For I myself was unable to heal anyone from it, nor did I see anyone before me who had succeeded in doing so.
And the operation on it, when it is located as we have said, is to precede and loosen the weak part from the black bile several times. Then phlebotomy itself if you find it with manifest fullness.
Then prepare the weak part with preparation in which it will be placed during the operation.
Then introduce into the cancer hooks that are suitable for it. Then scoop it out from every part with the skin, according to careful examination, until nothing remains of its roots; and let the blood flow, and do not cut it off quickly, rather press the locations and wipe away all thick blood with your hand, or with whatever instrument is possible there.
But if the flow of thick blood from the incision of an artery or vein opposes you, then cauterize the vein until the blood is cut off. Then treat it with the remaining treatment until it is healed.
Concerning the treatment of Hydropsy.
Chapter LIV. We have already explained in the division the kinds of hydropsy, and how the gathering of water occurs; and the signs of each kind, and its treatment with medicine.
And that which is treated with iron is only the kind of ascites alone; and it does not approach the kind of tympanitis with iron, nor the kind of hydrosarca deeply; for that is fatal.
When you have already treated this kind of hydropsy, tympanitis with medicine, and your medication has not been successful, then consider. For if the weak person has already experienced weakness, or is with it another infirmity besides hydropsy; such as if there is a cough with it, or loosening of the bowels, and things similar to those: then beware of treating him with iron, for there is fear of that.
If you see a weak person with excessive humors and there is no illness with him except dropsy alone: and he is neither a child nor an old man: then the method of operation on him is that you raise the weak person standing between your hands, and the assistant behind him presses his belly with his hand, driving the water to the lower part of the chest.
Then take a spiky speculum in this form. Let it be of two sharp points, long, with an acute extremity like a speculum. However, there should be some slight shortness in it so that you do not pierce through to the intestines during the operation and injure them.
Then consider. For if the dropsy generation is from the part of the intestines, then it is necessary that you lengthen the incision from the navel by the length of three fingers, downwards directly above the breastbone.
But if the dropsy generation is due to liver disease: then let your incision be on the left, from the navel by three fingers.
And if its generation is due to the spleen, then let the incision be on the right side; and it is also not necessary for the incision to be on the side on which the weak person wishes to lie, so that the superfluities do not flow to that weak spot.
Then pierce all the skin with an instrument. Then insert into that incision and lift your hand with the speculum between the skin and the flesh as if you are flaying it; and let the amount that is flayed be about the size of a nail or thereabouts.
Then pierce the flesh until the speculum reaches the hollow place; and that is the place of the water. Then extract it, and insert into the hole an instrument of this form. And it is like a cannula: made of silver, or bronze, or brass, smooth, polished; with a small hole at its lower part and three holes on its sides, two on one side and one on the other: and the tip of it is cut in the manner of a reed's incision, as you see; there is a ring at its upper end.
For when the instrument reaches the water, then it descends immediately upon the instrument, therefore it evacuates from the water in an hour a medium quantity.
For if you evacuate from it more than is necessary, in an hour perhaps the sick man dies through the resolution of his animal spirit; or syncope happens to him which approaches death.
But evacuate from it according to the quantity of his strength, and according to what the dispositions of the sick man signify to you from the virtue of his pulse, and from his good nature.
Then extract the instrument, and retain the water.
Which is because it is retained immediately on account of the skin which retains the hole which is above the sifac: of which I have spoken, so that you perforate it according to that manner.
Then repeat the instrument on the next day, if you see the sick man tolerate it; and evacuate also from the water a small quantity.
Do that for several days without fear, and guard yourself from error: until there does not remain from the water except a little.
But if you fear for the sick man, and dismiss from the water a great deal; then care for him with burial in warm sand, and much sweat in a bath and sun, and wait for thirst upon him; and care for him with drying medicines until he is healed; and cauterize above the stomach, and liver, and spleen, after the extraction of the water: according to what I have spoken in that which precedes.
Concerning the care of infants who are born with their urine places not perforated.
Chapter Fifty-Five
When any of the infants exits from the belly of its mother, and the head of its penis is not perforated, or there is a tight opening, or it is in a not proper place.
It is necessary therefore to assist with its perforation immediately when it is born with a fine Spatula according to this form.
Then place a fine lead plumb bob in the hole and tie it in place; hold it for three or four days.
Therefore, when he wishes to pass urine, remove it and let him urinate. Then replace it.
And if you do not place a lead weight, it is possible that the urine which flows over the area will prevent it from closing.
But he whose opening is narrow should be treated with a lead weight, as we have said, for many days until it is enlarged.
Those in whom the opening is in an unnatural place are injured. This is because the opening in those who are born with it is at the end of the penis: therefore he cannot urinate forward until he lifts his penis upward with his hand. Nor can he procreate because the semen cannot reach the womb in a straight line; and it is a very foul disease.
The method of operation for this condition is that the patient should lie on his back. Then extend the head of his penis with your left hand and make an incision on the top of the penis from its original position, with a sharp knife or scalpel, as though cutting a reed or radish so that the middle becomes like the head of the penis; and so that the opening falls in the middle as it should.
And beware of bleeding during the procedure. It often happens. Therefore apply a styptic to him with it and care for the wound until it heals.
Concerning ailments that occur in the foreskin and head of the penis, and putrefaction, blackness, and adhesion.
Chapter Fifty-Six.
These ailments often occur on the penis and are a foul prominence of flesh.
And some of them are malignant, and some are not malignant.
Therefore the non-malignant one must be suspended with a fine hook and cut off until it is entirely cleansed. Then place upon it cotton submerged in Egyptian ointment. Then care for it afterward with dyafinicon ointment until it heals.
But if it is malignant, of foul color, then it is necessary that you apply a cautery to it after its incision and the removal of its root.
But if the albather is in the foreskin of a captive, uncircumcised man, and part of it is between the foreskin and part of it is outside, then you must first remove the albather which is inside; until it consolidates, then care for the one outside. For when you care for them both at the same time, the foreskin will not be secured lest it be pierced.
And they also sometimes occur in the testicles, and blackness and corruption of the foreskin. Therefore it is necessary that you cut out everything which has already become blackened and which is wanting to be corrupted or has already been corrupted.
Then smear it afterward with honey which has already been mixed with flour of pomegranate rinds and crushed herb crib.
Then care for it with the remaining treatment until it heals.
But if there occurs a flow of blood, then apply a cautery with a lunar cautery according to this form.
For the cautery is helpful for two conditions at the same time, namely for a flow of blood and for a wound when it becomes corrupted.
But if the head of the penis is corroded and entirely destroyed within an hour: then it is necessary that you insert a lead cannula into the urethral opening so that the weak one may urinate upon it.
In the case of adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis, and this adhesion does not occur except in him whose foreskin is healthy and circumcision is not required upon it: and sometimes adhesion occurs because of a wound or an abscess: therefore it is necessary that you scrape it with a blunt spatula until the ligament is loosened and the head of the penis is freed from every part.
If it is difficult to distinguish these exquisitely, then it is necessary to excise something from the head of the penis, and from the foreskin. This is because when the foreskin is delicate it may perhaps be perforated quickly on account of its delicacy.
Then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a fine linen cloth which has already been moistened in cold water so that they do not adhere again.
Then let it be treated with astringent wine until it firms up.
Chapter LVII.
On the cleansing of infants, and the treatment of injuries accidental to them.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity like other wounds: nevertheless since it is from our operation, by our will, and its use is proper in boys, it is necessary that we mark in it a better operation and an easier way leading to health.
I say therefore that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books: because they do not use it in their laws and it is only something we have acquired through experience.
This is because I have found the greater part of craftsmen and phlebotomists using cleansing by circumcising with a razor and forceps; and they use cautery and ligation with thread, and incision with a nail.
And I myself have now tested all these methods, and I have not found a better one than cleansing with forceps and ligation with thread.
Because in cleansing with a razor, the skin often escapes. Because the skin of the foreskin has two coats: therefore perhaps the outer skin is cut and the inner coat remains: it is then necessary to make an incision to cut the other one and pain will occur. And with cleansing which is done by cautery, that is, a tool used by shoemakers, the incision of the extremity of the male member is not safeguarded: because perhaps it enters into its opening.
In cleansing however, if the nail should happen to be caught by the iron, it spoils your operation; and the skin of a child is naturally thin, and many times they are born thus, so that they do not need cleansing; and I have already seen this.
The cleansing however with forceps and the tying with thread has proved a good experiment to me; because the forceps are proportionate to the incision: therefore, because the sharpness which is above, is like the sharpness which is below. Therefore when you put forth your hand, the two sharpnesses are proportionate and they fall according to one operation in one time; and a compression is made of a similar figure containing the skin of the rod from every side with which no error occurs at all.
And the method of the proper operation is that you should estimate the boy especially, if he is one of those who understand a little, that you do not do anything except tying thread on his rod only; and let him go until another day.
Then make him rejoice and be merry in every way as possible for you from that because he receives his own understanding. Then make him stand between your hands in a prepared posture and let him not be sitting; and conceal the forceps in your sleeve or under your foot so that the boy does not see them at all nor anything of the instruments.
Then introduce your hand to his rod and blow upon the skin and draw it up until the head of the rod comes out. Then cleanse it from that which collects on it filthiness.
Then tie the marked place with a double thread. Afterwards tie below it a little further down a second ligature. Then hold with your index finger and thumb the place of the lower ligature with a good grip and cut between the two ligatures. Then lift the skin up quickly and extract the head of the rod. Then let the blood flow gradually (for it is better) and put powder on top of it; and upon the powder a cloth in which has been spread egg yolk boiled in rose water, stirred with good fresh rose oil; and let him place it on top of it until another day; and treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
The form of the forceps for cleaning is this.
Let the two ends be blunt, and let them be incident: so that a branch of the clavicle does not come out in them; and let the length of the two points be equal to the length of two handles equally.
But an error occurring in cleaning is this: because perhaps the whole inner skin escapes, or a part of it at the incision.
Therefore it is necessary that you extend it from your hour with your fingernail before applying the dressing to the place; and cut it according to equality.
And if you are not able to hold it with your fingernail, then extract it with a hook, and cut it.
But if three days pass it, and what is under the rod remains swollen, apply a dressing; then let that be until the abscess sits hot, and flay it easily, and cut it according to what is prepared for you; and beware of the head of the rod. For it will not harm him.
Therefore treat it with what strengthens the wound from powders, which we have related in the treatise on powders; and if it is cut above measure from the skin, and reaches upwards, it will not harm him either.
Therefore treat it with what we have said until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-Eight.
Concerning the extraction of retained urine in the bladder.
The retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made from stone, or congealed blood, or pus, or flesh grown, and similar things from those which we have said from the methods of treatment in division.
And if urine is not discharged, and you see that its retention is due to a stone which is already in the neck of the bladder; then it is necessary that he be weak, bent over on his knees. Then let his feet be placed upon his back, and let him extend his belly from the upper part of his back, and let the weak one restrain his breath as much as possible for him. Therefore, with the neck of the bladder directed towards the expulsion of the stone to the rear: urine is discharged.
But if it is not discharged with that which we have said, and the matter is vehement upon the weak one: then it is necessary that you administer his extraction with an instrument which is called a syringe, of which this is the form: Let it be of silver, and let it be slender, smooth, concave like the quill of a bird in the subtlety of a ray, long in the likeness of one and a half palms; to which there be a slender cannula at its head.
And the method of the exit of urine through it is, that you take a doubled thread, and bind wool or tow at its end with a good ligature; and introduce the end of the thread into the lower part of the syringe: and cut off with forceps anything superfluous from the wool, but introduce it into the cannula with vehemence, like an elevator.
Then smear the syringe with oil, or butter, and egg white as well; and make the weak one sit upon a seat, and embrocate the bladder, and its member with moist oils, olive oil, and warm water.
Then introduce the syringe into the member with ease until it reaches the root of the member.
Then double it upwards from the part above the umbilicus.
Then press the syringe within it until it reaches the bladder, and let the weak one feel that he has already reached the empty thing; and this is not done according to this order unless because the passage in which it goes is one in which there is tortuosity.
Then extend the thread with wool gradually. For the vein will follow the wool.
Then draw it out, and make the vein run through the passage of urine; and repeat the syringe, and do not cease to do this until the bladder is emptied and the sick person finds relief.
Concerning the quality of washing out the bladder with a Clepshydra.
Chapter LIX.
When an ulcer occurs in the bladder, or blood freezes in it, or pus constricts in it, and there is a desire to distill waters and medicines into it: then let it be done with an instrument called a Clepshydra, and this is its form.
For it is deaf, that is, closed. And there are three holes in it, two on one side and one on the other side, as you see.
And the concave place, in which is that which drives it, let it be according to the amount which it will fill itself without addition, until when it is drawn with it something is attracted from the moistures; and when it is driven, with it it is expelled afar: according to what the clepshydra does, with which naphtha is projected, that is, Greek fire in battles of Mars.
When therefore you wish to project moistures into the bladder, insert the extremity of the clepshydra into the moisture, and draw with it that which drives it upwards, for the moisture is attracted into the concavity of the clepshydra.
Then insert its extremity into the urethra, according to what we have related in the syringe. Then drive the moisture with that which drives it; for the moisture arrives at the bladder immediately, so that the sick person feels it.
The form of a delicate enema by which the bladder is washed out.
Let it be made of silver or electrum: whose head is higher, similar to a small cucumber, and beneath it a groove into which a ligature may fall.
Then take the bladder of a ram and put into it the moisture with which you wish to irrigate the bladder. Then tie it between two folds with a strong ligature using a double thread, and heat that moisture a little over the fire.
Then insert the end of the syringe into the rod, then squeeze your hand over the bladder with the moisture with a decent constriction until the weakling feels that the moisture has already reached the bladder.
But if a bladder is not present for you, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it, and pierce it through all its roundness. Then insert a strong thread into those holes as they revolve. Then gather the circle like a bundle of reeds is gathered: after you put into it what you wish from moistures, oils, and waters.
Then tie it into the instrument and do with it as you did with the bladder from expression with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter Sixty.
On the Extraction of a Stone.
We have already said in the division the species of Stone, and its treatment with medicine, and I said the difference between a Stone generated in the kidneys and the bladder, and the signs of it all: and I said the Stone in which the operation falls with the hand and incision: and it is a Stone generated properly in the bladder: and that which is attached to the rod, and I am narrating that with manifest exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore, I say that a Stone generated in the bladder most often happens to boys.
And from its signs is that the urine coming forth from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and there appears in it white sand, and the weakling rubs his rod, and labors with it, and often hangs down. Then he is erected, and comes forth with it the anus in many of them.
And healing is easy for children up to the age of fourteen. And it is difficult in the elderly. But in young people it is intermediate, in that which is between those things: and of the one whose stone is larger, healing is easier; and if small, it is the opposite of its care.
Therefore, when we come to healing, it is necessary first of all that we cleanse the sick person with an enema, which extracts all the dung that is in their intestines; for it sometimes hinders the discovery of the stone during examination.
Then let the sick person be taken with their feet and shaken, and moved downwards so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, or jumps from a high place several times.
Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be under his own hips so that the whole bladder becomes sloping downwards.
Then examine him and touch him externally.
If therefore you feel the stone in space, then hasten immediately with an incision over it.
But if it does not fall under your touch at all, then you must smear the index finger with oil of the left hand, if the patient is a boy, or the middle finger if he is a fully grown young man; and insert it into his anus, and inquire about the stone until it stands under your finger, and turn it gradually towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press on it with your finger and push it outwards towards the place where you desire the incision; and instruct an assistant to press the bladder with their hand, and instruct another assistant to extend the testicles with their right hand upwards; and with their other hand, to remove the skin which is under the testicles in the part where the incision is.
Then insert an incizing speculum, whose form is this. And find in it what is between the anus and the testicles, and not in the middle, to the side of the left natal: and let the incision be upon the stone itself, and your finger be in the anus: and let the incision be transverse, so that the incision externally be wide, and internally tight, according to the quantity so that the exit of the stone from it is not greater.
For perhaps the finger, which is in the anus, compresses the Stone at the incision, and it exits without difficulty.
And know that from a Stone which has angles and margins, therefore its exit becomes difficult because of that.
And from it is smooth, similar to a gland, and round: and its exit becomes easy.
Therefore to him who has angles and margins, add a fissure.
But if it does not exit thus, then it is necessary that you ingeniously work upon it: or you bind it with a bandage gently, whose end is like the moon, which binds upon the stone, and does not depart from it: or that you insert beneath it a subtle instrument, of curved extremity.
But if you are not able to do so upon it, then enlarge the opening a little. If something overcomes you from blood, cut it off with a cautery.
But if there are more than one stone, then first press the largest towards the mouth of the bladder. Then make an incision upon it. Afterwards press a small one after that, and similarly do if there are more than two.
But if it is very large, then ignorance is such that you make a larger incision upon it. For it happens to the weak one of two things, either that he dies, or there occurs to him a continuous distillation of urine: because the place does not consolidate at all.
But manage its expulsion until it exits: or ingeniously work upon fracturing it with forceps, until you extract it in pieces.
When therefore you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with frankincense, and aloe, and dragon's blood; and bind it up, and put upon it a cloth infused with oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water: so that a hot poultice may be applied.
Then place the patient on their back upon their neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day. When therefore you loosen it, embrocate the place with water and much oil.
Then care for it with dyafinicon ointment, and basilicon ointment until it heals.
But if it should happen that a hot abscess is added to the wound, and corrosions, and things similar to them: such as if blood should congeal in the bladder, and urine be prevented from flowing from it; and this is known from the discharge of blood with the urine. Therefore introduce your finger into the wound, and draw out that blood. For if it remains, it provokes corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt; and oppose to it every kind of thing suitable for its healing until it heals.
And it is necessary throughout the whole course of treatment, that you bind together the two thighs and the groin, on account of the medicines which are placed upon the spot.
But if the stone is small and is in the urethra, and it is fixed in it, and the passage of urine is prevented: then care for it with that which I have recounted before you come to incision. Very often indeed you are excused from incision by this treatment, for I have already proved it.
And it is, that you should take a perforator made of alferic iron, which has this shape: a triangular point, sharp, fixed in wood.
Then take thread and tie it with the penis below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the penetrating iron into the urethra with ease, until the perforator reaches the stone itself; and revolve the perforator with your hand in the stone gradually; and try to perforate it, until you make it penetrate from the other side.
For urine is then immediately discharged.
Then press your hand upon that which remains of the stone from the outer part of the urethra. For it itself is broken, and exits with the urine, and the sick person is healed.
But if this cure is not prepared for you, because of something that prevents it from him: then tie a thread below the stone, and another thread above the stone. Then cut above the stone in the urethra itself between the two ligatures. Then extract it. Afterwards untie the ligature, and clean the congealed blood which is made in the wound.
And the ligature below the stone is not necessary unless so that it does not return to the bladder; and the other ligature above unless so that when the thread is untied after the exit of the stone, the skin returns to its place, and the wound heals together; and because of this it is necessary for you when you tie the upper thread, that you elevate the skin upwards so that it returns at your completion, and the wound heals together as we said.
Chapter LXI.
Concerning the Extraction of a Stone in Women.
Few stones are generated in women.
But if it should happen to any of them a stone, then the cure is difficult, and is forbidden because of many ways.
One of these is: that the woman perhaps is a virgin.
And the second is, because you do not find a woman who will reveal herself to a physician when she is chaste, or among those having husbands.
Thirdly, because you do not find a woman who knows this art well, especially the operation with her hand.
And fourthly is the distance from the place of the stone; therefore it needs deep incision, and there is fear in that.
But if necessity provokes to that, then it is necessary that you take a female physician, well-knowing; and few are found.
But if you deprive her of these things, then seek a chaste physician, subtle, and present a female midwife well-taught in the matter of women, or a woman who inclines towards this part of the art; therefore make her present, and especially to her, that she do all that you command her from the inquiry about the stone.
First of all it is, that she look whether the woman is a virgin; then it is necessary that she insert a finger into her anus, and seek the stone.
If therefore she finds it, she shall constrict it under her finger, and then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vulva of the weak woman, and inquire over the stone, after she places her left hand upon the bladder, and compresses it with good compression.
If therefore she finds the stone, then it is necessary that gradually she move it from the orifice of the bladder to the lower parts with all her strength, until it arrives with it at the root of the thigh.
Then she shall cut above it at the opposition of the middle of the vulva at the root of the thigh, from whatever part it is prepared for her, and feels the stone in that part; and her finger is not removed from the stone, constricting under it: and let the incision be small at first. Then she shall insert a ray above that incision.
Then she shall insert a ray above that incision. If therefore she feels the stone, then let her add to the incision according to the proportion of what the stone goes out from it.
And know that there are many kinds of stone. For among these there is a small one and a large one, a smooth one and a rough one, a long one, and a round one having branches.
Therefore know its kind, so that it may be made known to you by this concerning that which you see.
If therefore blood overcomes you, then add ground zegi to the place, and hold it for one hour, until the blood is cut off.
Then return to your operation until the stone comes out; and make sure you prepare for yourself from the instruments which I mentioned in the extraction of a stone from men so that you may be aided by them in your operation.
But if the flow of blood overcomes you and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery which has been cut: then place powder over the place and bind it with powders in a proper binding; and do not change this; and let the stone go, and do not extract it. For perhaps an infirm woman may die. Then care for the wound.
When therefore the sharpness of the blood subsides after days and the place festers, then return to your operation until the stone comes out.
Chapter LX II.
On the incision for watery hernia.
A watery hernia is nothing but a collection of moisture in the sifac alba, which is under the skin containing the testicle; and it is called sifac.
And sometimes it is in its own groin, which nature prepared for it in the part where it swells until it appears; which is another testicle, and it is the skin of the testicle between the sifac alba, as we said; and this does not happen except rarely.
And the generation indeed of this hernia is from weakness that happens to the testicles; therefore this material flows down to them. And sometimes it happens from a blow upon the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors. For its color is either sloping towards yellowness, or it is bloody red, or fecal black, or it is watery white, and that is what is more.
And the signs by which it is known where there is a gathering of water are these. For if it is in the white sifac as we said, then the abscess is round in length a little like the shape of the letter O, and the testicle does not appear, because the moisture contains it from every side.
And if the moisture is in its own groin, then the abscess is round with a part of the letter O, and therefore a man judges that it is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white sifac, then it falls under the sense.
Therefore when you wish to know the color of the moisture, then experience the color of the moisture in the abscess with a square instrument, whose form preceded. According to that therefore which comes out in the trace of the instrument, judge concerning that which is between it.
When therefore we come to the treatment with iron, it is necessary that you advise the sick man, so that he be bled if it is possible for him, and you see his body full.
Then let him be laid on his back on a high thing a little, and put many cloths under him.
Then sit you on his left and order the attendant to sit at his right, who extends his rod to one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles, and to a part of the belly cavity.
Then take a broad scalpel and cut the skin of the testicles from the middle through the length, up to near the comb; and let the incision be according to the straightness of an equidistant line which divides the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white sifac comprehending it; and flay it out, and observe, or beware from this, lest you cut it: and let your flaying be from the part which hangs with the egg more; and carefully scrutinize with the flaying according to the amount that is possible for you.
Then pierce the full bladder with a wide perforation and draw out all the water.
Then separate between the two lips of the incision with hooks and extend the bladder upward, and do not touch the skin enveloping the testicles; and incise the bladder in whatever way it is possible for you to incise it, either with its entirety or in parts, especially its thin side. For if you do not meticulously examine it, there is no safety in its incision lest the water return.
But if the external testicle proceeds from its skin during your operation: then when you have completed the incision of the bladder, return it. Then join the two lips of the skin of the testicles with suture.
Then care for it like other wounds until it heals.
But if you find the testicle corrupted from blackness or another cause, then it is necessary that you tie the vessels which are the suspender, fearing a flow of blood.
Then cut off the testicle with the suspender and extract the testicle; afterwards care for it as we have said.
But if the water is collected in two parts, then know that there are two branches; therefore cut off the other part according to what you did in the other equally.
And if it seems to you that the operation should be one, then do so; then wash away the blood. And insert into the incisions wool dipped in oil, or in rose oil; and place outside other wool which you have dipped in wine and oil, and spread it over the two testicles and observe the belly; and put double cloths on top of them, and they are poultices; and bind them on top with a bandage which has six according to this form.
Then take two cloths and take them and fill them with ground carminative according to this likeness; and let the ends be pressed from the elbow or damp wool; and join them together with a bandage on the upper arms: and let one of the ends receive above the anus up to the back, and let the second receive to the part of the breastbone; and let two ends above the two thighs below, and let the other two ends above the two groins, and let the whole bandage be joined on the upper arms.
And sometimes this wound is artificially treated with a cautery in the place of incision with an iron; and it is that you take a surgical cautery subtle and thin and cut the skin of the testicles with it; and it is ignited, as we have said: until when white pus appears containing water: then take a cautery, according to this shape.
Greek letters are assimilated.
Then pierce that pus with it and ignite it until all the moisture comes out.
Then extend the pus with hooks and flay it with a thin ignited cautery and cut it according to what is possible for you until you eradicate all of it.
And be careful that the fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is safer and farther from bleeding and better than the operation with an incision.
But if it opposes you in the hour of incision, or in the hour of cautery a hot abscess, or a flow of blood, or anything else: then it is necessary that you cure what it opposes you with from it with the treatment which suits it, according to what has been said before.
But if he is weak and timid and does not await this operation because of its horror: then perform a perforation according to what I narrate that: and it is.
When it is confirmed to you with that which we said about the meanings, that the wound is watery: then it is necessary that you make the weak person sit on a raised seat.
Then pierce the abscess in the lower part of it with a wide speculum; and place the piercing according to the length of the body, and let the opening be wide until all the water runs out.
Then place a poultice on the place and bind it and let it so that the rest of the water runs out; then treat it until the wound is healed.
But if there is opposition to the exit of water at the hour in which you pierce it, and this is not so except because the white subcutaneous layer makes opposition at the opening of the wound and prevents the exit of water; then it is necessary that you introduce a pen into the wound, or an instrument with which water is extracted from dropsy patients, whose form precedes; or add a little in the operation of the wound.
And know that water returns and gathers after six months, or around them. Therefore, when it gathers, then it is returned according to the same method, and the sick person will pass through his days.
Chapter 63.
Concerning the treatment of fleshy branches.
Know that in the section upon this branch, there is fear leading to destruction in many constitutions. Therefore it seems to me that its dismissal is saving from it.
And I remember the operation upon it and the nature of an abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses occur in bodies, from which testicles are composed; and this happens from many causes, namely.
Either from acute or sharp superfluity which is poured out upon the testicles. Or from a blow.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body and pain is not found in it; and the abscess is serious.
And perhaps it is a stony abscess whose color is dark brown, and there is no sensation to it.
And sometimes it happens from the nodulation of arteries and their inflation as has already preceded in its recollection; or from the inflation of veins.
That which is from them by inflation of arteries is recognized by the disposition of the abscess when you press it with your fingers. And it is not necessary for you to touch it completely.
That which is done by the inflation of veins, nothing is dispersed from it upon compression with the fingers.
And now it is possible that a section be made on this type and on the other flesh; and it is to cut the skin of the testicles. Then extend the testicle upward and extract it with white silk; and free the spermatic cord from the vessels and tie off the vessels; and cut the spermatic cord after you have freed it from every part of the parts of the testicle.
But if the testicle is consolidated with those flesh which are born, then it behooves you to draw out the testicle and cut into it.
And if there is adhesion between something from the spermatic cord or in that which is between the vessels: then it behooves you to free all that adhesion and cut into it with a round incision.
But if there is a birth of flesh in the place of adhesion which is behind: then it behooves you to cut into all of it and extract the testicle as we have said.
When therefore your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; and then care for it with the other care until it heals.
Chapter LXIII.
Concerning the Care of Branches which are with the Vine.
A hydrocele is a swelling enclosed by a certain involution, like a hernia, with softening of the testicles; and it makes difficult movement and exercise and walking upon the weak.
And there is fear in the treatment of this ailment because of that of which we have previously made mention.
But it is necessary for us to say that an operation should be done on it according to what the first ones did.
Therefore I say that it is necessary for you to make the weak one sit upon a raised seat. Then press the spermatic cord of the testicle downward. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, along with the veins that are near the penis; and let another attendant hold it and stretch it out with a vigorous extension.
Then make an incision with a broad, sharp scalpel in a transverse section directly on the vessels, until the vessels are exposed.
Then remove the skin from all sides, as we have told you in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
Then fix a needle into them in which there is a double thread, and tie it in the first of the places where the veins occur; and tie it again at the last of them. Then cut them in a straight section in the middle according to the length of the body, and extract what is collected from damp, corrupted residues.
Then treat the wound with the care of the other wounds, in which you wish to generate pus, so that the vessels which nourish one of the testicles may fall away. For it is not bad through that.
But if it should happen to a vein with all the veins, then it is necessary that the testicles along with the veins be extracted; so that the testicle may not be deprived of nourishment because of the incision and waste away, or become charred, and there may not be pleasure from them.
Chapter LXV.
Concerning the care of branches of the intestine.
The cause of this branching is from a section which occurs on the intestines extended over the belly in the part of the groin out of the region of the belly.
Therefore the intestines descend from that rupture to one testicle. And this rupture is either from a section, or extension of it.
And these two kinds happen from many causes: either from a blow, or a jump, or a shout, or the lifting of a heavy object, and similar things.
And the sign, when it is from an extension of the intestines. It happens gradually over a long time and does not happen suddenly: and it is an abscess equal towards the depth: because the sifach compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it is when it is from the section of the sifach, because it causes to happen from its beginning intense pain suddenly: and it is a different abscess, apparent under the skin nearby: and that is because of the exit of the intestine, and its course to the exterior of the sifach.
And sometimes it exits with an intestine zircon: and this is called intestinal Ramex, and zircon: and sometimes it happens with windiness.
And sometimes feces runs into the intestine, and is retained there: and it is with this deadly danger to the sick person: because it causes severe pain to happen, and especially when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of these species of illness with iron there is fear: therefore it is necessary that caution be taken in this case.
And the method of operation is, that you instruct the sick person to reduce the intestine with his hand into the interior of its cavity, if it obeys return. Then he is laid back on his neck between your hands: and his legs are raised.
Then extend the skin which follows the skin above, and cut all the skin of the testicles lengthwise. Then fix hooks in the two lips of the incision, according to as you judge for opening the incision with them: and the incision should be according to the quantity, so that it is possible for an egg to come out from it.
Then scrape the siphak, and what are under the skin of the testicles, until when the white sifach is uncovered, hard from every side: then introduce your index finger into it which follows the testicle, into that which is between the white sifach, which is under the skin, and the second sifach, and break with it the adhesion which is in the back part of the testicle.
Then move with your right hand to the inner skin of the testicles; and with this extend a white bandage upwards with your left hand; and raise the testicle with the bandage to the part to be cut; and instruct the assistant to extend the testicle upwards; and you loosen the adhesion that is behind after the completion of the solution.
And search with your fingers so that nothing from the intestine remains uncoiled within the hard white bandage. But if you find anything from it, then press it down towards the lower belly.
Then take a needle with a thick thread made of licorice from ten threads; and insert it at the last bandage, that is, the tunic which is under the skin of the testicles following the incision; then cut off the ends that protrude from the thread until there are four threads. Then arrange some of them over others with a shape like a cross; and tie them with the bandage which we mentioned, because it is under the skin of the testicles with a strong ligament, until none of the vessels that nourish them can send anything to them: so that a hot abscess does not occur from there. And place another ligature outside the first ligature, distant from it by less than two fingers. And after these two ligatures, let out from the bandage which is under the skin of the testicles a quantity equal to the size of a finger; and cut the rest entirely according to its roundness, and remove the testicle from it.
Then cauterize in the lower part of the skin of the testicles with an incision from which blood and pus flow; as we narrated in what has preceded.
Then apply wool soaked in oil and place it in the wound; and administer the ligature which we have narrated. And sometimes the white bandage which we mentioned is cauterized after its incision fearing blood flow. This very often happens. And release the ligature, until it falls by itself.
But if its falling is delayed, then embrocate it with warm water and place upon it that which we have said, until it falls.
Then care for the wound with the remaining care of wounds, until it is healed.
Chapter Sixty-Six.
Concerning a windy branch.
In this branch, I have not seen anyone who dared to operate on it with iron.
And first indeed they said that it is done as we have narrated in the branch which is with the vine. Which is, that you should ligate the vessels after division above them with ease below: then cut in the middle and care for it finally with what opens it up, until the vessels fall: and care for the wound according to what we have said, until it is healed.
Chapter Sixty-Seven.
Concerning a disruption which occurs in the groins.
When a rupture occurs in the groins, as we have said, and the place protrudes, and nothing from the intestines descends to the testicles: and if it does descend, it is little, and returns in all hours: but if time prolongs with that, a fissure is added in the groin, until the intestines descend into the groin.
And this happens from the extension of the groin which is in the groins, as we have said. Which is because the groin is extended: then it softens and the place becomes inflamed and protrudes.
And its care is with a cautery, as its previous narration preceded.
And sometimes it is cured with iron, according to this method: and it is, that the sick person should lie on their back between your hands. Then cut the inflamed and protruding place of the rupture by a width according to the measure of three fingers.
Then bind the ligature and, what are under the skin, until a white vein is revealed, which follows it underneath the skin.
Then take a needle and place it upon the prominent spot from the vein and press it deeply into the belly.
Then mark two prominent spots above the extremity of the needle from the vein and connect them with a suture, then extract the extremity of the needle.
And do not cut the vein at all, nor pull the testicle, or anything else, as I have made you know in the treatment of hemorrhoids.
Then treat it with wound care. When therefore you cut the threads, clean it and restore the wound until it consolidates.
For the vein contracts and no eminence of a rupture is added.
And cautery is better in this place, because it is closer to safety.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the softening of the skin of the testicles.
Very often the skin of the testicles is softened in certain men, on account of which the flesh between them is softened and its appearance is spoiled.
Therefore it is necessary for him who is asked in its treatment to make the sick man lie on his back and cut all the softened skin upon the natural skin.
Then bring together the two lips with a suture, and if you wish, sew the excess of softened skin first with three or four sutures and make the suture firm.
Then cut between the sutures.
Then treat it with the care of other wounds until it is healed and the threads fall out.
Chapter LXIX.
On Castration.
Know that castration is excommunicated in our law and because of that it would be permitted for me not to remember it in this book of mine, and there is no need to remember it except for two ways.
One of them is that it should be in the knowledge of a physician when questioned about it, and to know its cure for whomever it happens to.
And another way is that we often need the castration of certain animals for our own uses through it, such as rams, boars, and cats, and similar animals.
Therefore I say that castration is done in two ways. Or by abrasion. Or by fissure and incision.
In that which is done by abrasion, the way of the operation is: that we make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles are softened and relaxed and hang down; then abrade them with your hand until they are dissolved and do not appear to the touch.
In castration by fissure and incision, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then tie the suspensory ligament and cut above the whole testicle with one incision until when two testicles proceed; then incise them after you have skinned both, and do not leave anything above them except a fine silk thread which is upon the vessels.
And this method of castration is better than that which is done by abrasion; because abrasion perhaps leaves something from the testicles, wherefore the animal desires copulation.
Then care for the wound until it heals.
Chapter Seventy.
Concerning the care of a hermaphrodite in two ways.
A hermaphrodite is from males in two ways. One of them is because it appears in it that a space follows, or in the skin of the testicles, in that which is between the two testicles, a shape like a woman's vulva, in which there are hairs: and sometimes urine runs from that which is in the skin of the testicles.
In women, however, there is one species, and it is the vulva of a woman above the pubic bone just like the testicles of a man, small indeed, prominent outwardly; one of which is like the penis of a man, and two like the two testicles.
And the treatment of the three species, two from men, and one species from women, is: because it is necessary that you cut away the added flesh until the impression of them escapes. Then treat them with the care of other wounds.
But in the second species of men, from which urine flows, which is in the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is there any treatment at all.
Chapter Seventy-One.
On the incision of a tenting and prominent flesh in the vulva of women.
A tenting may perhaps be added upon the natural part until its appearance becomes unsightly and foul; and sometimes it magnifies in certain women so much that it expands like in men, and reaches even to copulation.
Therefore it is necessary that you hold the excess of the tenting with your hand or with a hook and make an incision; and do not stop in the incision, especially deep at the root; so that bleeding does not occur.
Then treat it with the care of other wounds until it heals.
But the flesh that arises is flesh that is born in the opening of the womb until it fills it; and perhaps it protrudes outward according to the likeness of a tail; and because of this some of the ancients call the ailment tailed. Therefore it is necessary that we incise it just as we incise a tenting and treat it until it heals.
On the treatment of alratica, which is an imperforate vulva of a woman.
Chapter Seventy-Two.
Alratica is when the vulva of a woman is not perforated, or when there is a small opening. It is either natural or accidental.
It is accidental from a preceding illness and indeed that happens either from added flesh born of the flesh, or a subtle or thick suture; and it happens either in the depth of the womb, or its sides, or its upper part, or its lower part; and it prevents coition and impregnation and childbirth, and perhaps prevents menstruation.
And knowledge of it is gained through the examination of a midwife if nearby opilation is apparent.
But if it is not apparent, then seek it with your fingers or with a probe.
But if the opilation is from a subtle suture and is near the two labia, then hurry and break it apart.
And it is as if you should place poultices on the two labia.
Then put the index fingers of both hands together and let the woman be on her back with her legs spread apart. Then extend the two labia with force until the subtle suture is broken and the opilation is opened.
Then take wool and soak it in oil and put it on the spot; and let the woman come together every day so that the place does not consolidate with other juice.
But if the suture is thick and coarse then it is necessary to cut it with a broad spatula similar to a myrtle leaf.
But if the opilation is from flesh born then suspend it with hooks and cut into it; and let there be with you medicines that stop the flow of blood without biting, such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and thus a mixture with albumen and egg white.
Then administer a wide lead cannula so that the wound does not heal quickly, let her have it for several days; and administer a licorice from dry linen, then let the rest be cured until it is healed.
And sometimes other flesh will be born within the womb; it is therefore necessary that they be cut according to this method: but for a cancerous abscess, as an abscess which is cancerous and within the womb, do not oppose iron at all.
Chapter Seventy-Three.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, fistulas, and red boils in the vulvas of women.
Hemorrhoids are indeed the opening of the veins, until much blood constantly flows from them.
Therefore, when hemorrhoids become inflamed, they turn into fistulas; and I have already said in the division of their kinds, and their signs; and I will say here which of them receive a cure, and which do not.
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids which are in the opening of the uterus, and do not appear to the senses, then there is no cure for them with iron.
But those which are from them in the opening of the uterus upon which the sense falls, are those that are cured.
Therefore it is necessary that you introduce the woman into a cold house. Then extend the fistulas with forceps, or with a rough cloth, and cut them from their roots.
Then powder over them at the flow of blood from one of the cutting powders without modification: such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and thus, and similar to them.
Then press her feet against the wall for one hour. Afterwards, place her in cold water.
But if the flow of blood persists: then make her sit in a decoction of sumac, and pomegranate rinds, and galls, and similar things.
Then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it upon her back.
If, therefore, the blood is cut off with that, it is good; and if not, make the windlasses adhere to the back, and nipples, without scarification.
Then take wool and submerge it in the juice of tamarind, or the juice of arugula, or the juice of the branches of a plant called alaul, that is, aglant, Pontic wine, and make it adhere to the part.
Therefore, when the abscess is quiet, care for the place with ointments until it heals.
The bartholin's gland, however, is red and resembles a rosehip and has a rough appearance.
Therefore it is necessary that you cut out what appears from it, according to what I said about the thelil equally; and care for it until it heals.
Chapter Seventy-Fourth.
Concerning the perforation of a fistula which occurs in the womb.
Many kinds of abscesses occur in the womb, such as cancer, and stone abscesses, and ulcers, and adubelati, and alekilati, that is, herpes, aestiomemus, and fistulas, and hemorrhoids, and fissures, and thelil, and hot abscesses.
And I have indeed already said all these diseases and their kinds, and their signs, and their cures in the division; it is necessary that I say in this treatise hot abscesses which occur in the womb, when they are from abscesses which collect pus, and you wish to know how its opening is made with an iron instrument.
Therefore it is necessary for you to consider. Then if the pain of the abscess in its beginning is sharp with percussion, and burning, and fever; and you see it reddening; if numbness falls upon it, then do not hurry with its perforation; and care for it with that which helps towards maturation, until when the sharpness of the occurrences subsides.
Then it is necessary that you make the woman sit upon a seat which has two seats, and recline, or lean upon her back, and bring together her feet to the lower part of her belly; and let her hips be spread out, and put her arms under her knees, and tie each one with a suitable ligament to it.
Then let the midwife sit on her right side, and administer the instrument with which the opening of the womb is opened.
And it is necessary when you wish to administer this instrument, that you fix it with a Probe deep in the matrix of the woman: so that what enters from the instrument is not more than the depth of the matrix, and injures the infirm.
But if the instrument should be more than deep, then it is necessary that you place puluillos upon the covering of the deep matrix: so that entry of the whole instrument into the depth of the matrix is prohibited: and it is necessary that he put a verticel which runs in the instrument from the upper side; and that he hold the instrument, and that the minister turn the verticel until the deep matrix is opened.
Therefore when the Exitura appears and is touched by the hand and is soft and pliable: then it is necessary that you cut it at its head with a wide speculum.
Therefore when the blood is evacuated, then it is necessary that you place a licorice root submerged in rose oil: or green oil, in which there is some astringency; and place the licorice, and extract the incision in the depth of the matrix.
And place externally upon the matrix, and upon the comb clean wool submerged in water, in which apples have been boiled.
Then let it be treated after two days with an ointment suitable for it, until it heals.
And when the matrix and wound are washed, so that it is cleansed with water and honey; then with water in which lily root or long aristolochia has been boiled: then return to the ointment.
But if the wound should be hidden inside in the matrix, then it is necessary that you prohibit its cure with iron, but rather treat it with what we said in the division.
Chapter LXXV.
Doctrine of Obstetrics, how living embryos are treated according to an unnatural figure having emerged.
It is necessary for a midwife to know first the figure of natural childbirth.
Therefore, by these signs it is known that when you see a woman pressing down towards her lower parts, and she desires to smell the air, and relief comes over her concerning what is upon her from childbirth, and she hastens the exit of the embryo: then know that this birth is according to the natural figure, and its exit is upon its head, and secondarily with it: or suspended, or hanging from the navel.
Therefore when you see these signs, it is necessary that her belly be pressed so that the embryo descends quickly.
For when it descends upon its head, the second one descends with it, and it is cleansed from those superfluities by a good cleansing.
But that which is besides this birth is unnatural, unpraiseworthy.
For sometimes the fetus exits upon its feet, and its body exits before its head, and its feet and its hands together, or one of its feet; or its head and hands exit; or its belly exits; and perhaps it turns upon its neck, and similar things from unpraiseworthy figures.
Therefore it is necessary for a midwife to be prudent, subtle in all these things, and to beware of error and deception; and I am showing every figure from them, and how the mind is in it, and let it be signified by that, and let it stand upon it.
When the fetus exits upon its head by its natural exit, and it becomes vehement upon the woman, and childbirth becomes difficult for her, and you see her strength already weakened: then make her sit upon a seat, or let women hold her; and vaporize the wool of her with decocted fenugreek, and with moist oils.
Then let the midwife insert a small spatula between her fingers, and find the second one with it, and cut it with her nail until what is in it runs out from moisture; and press the woman's belly until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, then she must be given an enema made from fenugreek mucilage and sesame oil.
Then order her to compress after the enema, and make her snort when she is compressed, and hold her mouth and nose for one hour. For the fetus will immediately come out.
But if two hands of the fetus first emerge, it is necessary that you return them gradually with ease. But if it does not obey upon entering, then place the woman upon a seat and raise her feet upward; then strike the seat upon the ground, and let the woman be held so that she does not fall at the impact.
But if the hands do not come out and the fetus dies, then cut them, and extract the remaining fetus; and bind his hand with cloth, and extract it equally, for he will come out.
Delivery of an embryo over its feet. When the fetus comes out on its own feet, it is necessary to push them upward; then gradually turn the fetus; afterwards equalize it.
Then let him take one of its feet and extend it gradually.
When they come out as far as the hips, then order her to compress and make her snort when she is compressed, for it will come out if God wills.
And if it does not come out with what we have related, then return the fetus gradually until you place it according to its natural form. For then it will come out with an easy exit.
But if it is prevented with all that we have related, then take fenugreek mucilage and sesame oil, and dissolved gum; and strike the whole in a mortar with good percussion; then smear it upon the vulva of the woman, and below her belly. Then make her sit in warm water until the hypocondria follows.
Therefore when you see that her lower parts are already warmed, then give her a suppository of myrrh and insert it. When therefore she has held the suppository for one hour, then make her sit upon a seat. Then make her belch and compress her mouth and nose, and press the lower part of her belly with a gentle compression. For the fetus will come out immediately.
The delivery of the fetus upon the knees and hands. When it comes forth according to this form, then he should gradually insert his hands. Then the woman should be turned onto her neck, and her feet should dangle downwards; and she herself should lie upon a bed, and intertwine her hands. Then press upon her belly gradually. Then draw out what is under her feet from the cushions until she is prepared in the lower part. But if the fetus does not come forth, then take hold of her feet and move them with a forceful motion. Then press what is above the hypocondria gradually until the fetus ascends to the upper parts. Then let him insert his hands and equalize the fetus gradually; and instruct the woman to compress herself until the fetus comes forth.
The delivery of the fetus hanging laterally from the hands. He should apply himself to reducing his hand. But if he cannot reduce it, then raise the woman and make her walk.
But if she cannot walk, then make her lie upon a bed; and strike her legs with a forceful concussion.
Then administer the unguent which you have prepared from gums.
But if she receives her labor, then make her sit upon a seat. Then strive in the reduction of the hand, and equalize the swelling according to the natural shape; and make the woman snore, and order her to compress herself until it comes out.
The exit of the fetus over its neck, with hands spread out, and its face is towards the back of its mother. It is necessary that the midwife hold the hand of the fetus, then turn it gradually, and equalize it with ease.
When, therefore, it is equalized, then place upon its vulva what we have described made of oil and gums.
Then order her to move gradually. When therefore you have done this, then make her sit upon a seat, and order her to lean towards her right side. Then order her to compress herself; and make her snore when it is pressed.
The exit of the prepared fetus over the side. When it descends to the orifice of the matrix according to this manner with the second membrane, then split the second membrane with your nail until it is evacuated from moisture.
If, therefore, it hangs over the face of the fetus and its neck, then cut it from the umbilicus so that it is not retained, and dies.
Then press the fetus towards the inside until you place it as is necessary; and order the woman to compress herself several times, for it will indeed exit by an easy way.
The exit of twins, or many fetuses. Know that twins very often are born; and sometimes three are born, and four. However, that is extraordinary, and rarely happens.
Five indeed is against nature and they do not live entirely; and it contains them, although they are multiplied, with one second membrane; and they are separated through a siphon, distinguishing the tied part in the umbilicus of each of them.
And sometimes they exit as does a single fetus by natural birth, easily; and they exit by an inglorious outlet, as we have recounted.
And if some of them are difficult at birth, and they reach what we said about unnatural figures, then take care of them as we have recounted; let there be a subtle midwife, and let her do what she does with ease and slowness, and let her contrive according to every figure with that which is prepared for her by wit leading to safety.
A remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos, and are aborted.
Sometimes one is formed in the womb, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten; and it has already been verified by me that a woman aborting emitted seven, and another fifteen, all formed.
Which was done by the measurement of the glorious sage.
Therefore all this ought to be in the knowledge of Obstetrics. For perhaps it may happen upon her like that: let her therefore oppose him with what is necessary
Chapter LXXVI.
Of the Extraction of a Dead Fetus.
When you care for a dead fetus as I said in the division from medication, and it does not exit, and you are forced to use surgery with your hand, then it is necessary that you consider.
If therefore the woman is of sound constitution, and she is not with any of the accidents from which her loss is feared: then it is necessary that the woman be laid on her back upon a bed, and let her head be inclined downwards, and let her legs be elevated; and let the attendants hold her from two sides, or let her be tied to the bed so that her body is not pulled out at the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the mouth of the womb with wet oils with the mucilage of marshmallow, fenugreek, and flaxseed.
Then let the midwife anoint her hand with these oils and gums; then let her introduce it into the womb easily. Then let her seek with it a place in which to fix hooks from the fetus, and suitable places for that.
Consider then if the fetus is prepared to descend upon its head; then fix hooks into its eyes, or into its neck, or into its mouth, or into its palate, or under its beard, or into its collarbone, or into places near the ribs, and under its hypochondria.
But if the descent is upon its feet, then into its breastbone, and its middle ribs.
And it is necessary that she hold the hook with her right hand; and place the curvature of it in that which is between the fingers of her left hand; and introduce it with her hand easily, and fix the hook in one of those places which we have said, until it reaches an empty thing.
Then let her fix another hook opposite it, or a third if necessary; so that there is equal contraction and it does not lean to one side.
Then let it be extended with equal extension, and let there not be extension according to straightness only, but rather let it be moved to every part so that its exit is relieved; just as it is done when a tooth is eradicated.
And it is necessary in that which is between it, that the extension be softened. And if a part is retained from it, then the midwife must anoint some fingers with oil and introduce them from the side, so that she revolves what is retained with them.
If then a part of the fetus goes out, then let the hooks be changed to another place which is higher; do this until the whole fetus comes out.
If then a hand goes out before the others, and it is not possible to reduce it because of its constriction; then it is necessary that a cloth be wrapped over it. Then extract it until the whole thing comes out, cut it either at the junction of the sole or at the elbow; and thus you must do it on one hand and on both feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or constriction occurs at its exit, or there is water collected in its head: then it is necessary that you insert a Spatumile with spines between your fingers and bore through the head with it and extract the water; or break it up with an instrument called Almisdac: whose form comes with the forms of the other instruments in the chapter which follows.
Do the same if the fetus is of a large-headed nature, then you must cut through the algengematu: or extract it with a misdach, as we have said. Then draw out the bones with forceps.
But if the head comes out, and is constricted at the fork: then bore it, until the moisture which is in the chest is poured out.
But if it does not become entangled, nor yield to coming out: then cut the head into pieces as much as is possible for you.
But if there is an abscess below the belly, or there is dropsy in it: then you must pierce it until the moisture runs out of it.
But if the fetus is on its feet, then its attraction is easy and its direction to the mouth of the womb is slight.
But if it becomes constricted at the belly or chest: then you must pull it out with a cloth which you have wrapped around your hand: and bore the belly or chest until what is in them runs out.
But if the remaining limbs are taken away and the head returns: then let the midwife introduce her left hand. Therefore if the mouth of the womb is open, let her introduce her hand deep into the womb and seek the head with it and draw it up to the mouth of the womb with her fingers: then let her insert one hook or two hooks in it and draw it out with them.
If the mouth of the uterus is constricted due to a hot abscess which has occurred in it: then it is not necessary for him to labor over it, rather he ought then to administer an effusion of humid and fatty things, and apply poultices, and sit in waters which soften and moisten.
If the fetus is on its side, then it is possible that it may be equalized; then let what we said about the living fetus be administered.
If that is not possible, then it shall be cut into pieces and extracted.
And it is necessary that you not leave anything from the placenta inside at all.
Therefore when you have completed your operation then administer what we said about hot abscesses which occur in uteruses.
If a flow of blood should occur, then let her descend into astringent waters and administer the remaining care.
And I myself have indeed already seen a woman, in whose belly a fetus had died; then she became pregnant again with another, afterward that fetus also died. It therefore happened to her after a long time that an abscess formed in her navel, and it swelled up until it opened and began to discharge pus.
I was therefore called for her care and treated her for a long time; and the wound did not heal.
I therefore put on it some poultices of strong attraction, and a mouth came out of the place. Then several days passed for her, and another mouth came out. I therefore wondered from that point, since there was no mouth in her belly.
I therefore thought that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
I therefore inquired into the wound and extracted many bones, with the woman being in better dispositions; and she has now lived thus for a long time, and sends out little pus from the place.
And I did not include this here as something foreign unless because there is knowledge in it and help for that which the craftsman physician administers with his hand from healing.
Chapter LXXVII.
On the Forms of Instruments Necessary in the Extraction of a Fetus
The form of a Whorl by which the uterus is opened.
Here below is the form of a Strictor, as it is found in the books, to which two whorls are equally fitted at the ends of two pieces of wood. However, these whorls ought to be more delicate than the rest of the Strictor and they should be made either from ebony or boxwood.
And the width of all the wood should be about two fingers, and the edge of each of the two is about one finger wide, and the length of each of them is a palm and a half; and in the middle of the two pieces of wood are two additions of the same kind of wood, which have already been fixed to both, whose length is half a palm and a little more; and the width of each is about two fingers or a little more.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the uterus so that it opens with them when you turn the two whorls.
Another form similar to that one, more delicate and lighter.
It should be made of ebony or boxwood wood, according to the likeness of forceps. However, at the end of it there should be two additions, as you see here above; and the length of each addition from them is about a palm; and the width of each is two fingers.
Therefore, when you wish to open the uterus with it, then have the woman sit on a bed with her feet dangling, opening what is between her thighs. Then insert these two joined additions into the uterus; and you hold the lower part of the instrument between her thighs. Then open your hand with an instrument, as you do with forceps, equally according to the amount which you wish from the opening of the mouth of the matrix, until the midwife does what she wants.
The form of another Vertigo than the ancients said The Compelling Form by which the fetus is impelled.
The form of Almisdac, by which a large head is pressed, and it is assimilated to forceps, which have teeth at the extremity, as you see.
And sometimes it is made oblong, like forceps according to this form, as you see, which has teeth like the teeth of a saw, by which it is cut and pressed.
The form of Uncini having one spine.
The form of Uncini having two spines.
The form of Spatula having two extremities for cutting off the head.
The form of two Spatulas also spread apart.
All these instruments are exercised, and the more their kinds are multiplied and they are prepared by a craftsman, the quicker they are for their operation, and the higher they are esteemed among men, because of their quantity.
Therefore, do not despise any instrument from them, but have it prepared by you. For the necessity of them is inexcusable.
Chapter 78.
Concerning the Extraction of a Second Child.
When a second child is retained during labor, then it is necessary that you instruct the weak woman to retain her breath. Then have her groan when she is strained; and compress your hand over her mouth and nostrils. If therefore it exits through this, it is good.
If not: then take a pot and perforate a hole in the lid; and place herbs which open the mouth of the matrix therein, such as calamus, rue, anise, chamomile, dill, cassia lignea, and centaury; take all these herbs or some of them, and submerge them with water, and place them over fire.
Then place a reed tube over the hole of the crucible pot, and the other end into the mouth of the mold; and hold it until the vapor reaches the concavity of the mold.
Then make it snort, as we said. For then it will come out easily.
But if it remains after this treatment and does not come out: then order the midwife to submerge her hand in oil of sesame, or hollyhock mucilage. Then let her introduce it into the vulva and seek the secundina with it. When she has found it, then let her take hold of it and gradually extend it.
But if it is attached deep within the mold, then let her introduce her hand, as we have described, until she finds the secundina and gradually extracts it according to its straightness so that the mold does not fall due to strong attraction; indeed, it must be shifted with ease to the right and left sides: then add to the amount of attraction. For it then obeys and is preserved and comes loose from its adhesion.
But if the mouth of the mold is constricted, as we have already said: treat it with snorting and from the pot's medication with herbs.
But if it does not come out with all that we have said, then be careful not to tire yourself in the repetition of the extraction.
But it is necessary that what comes out from its mouth bind it to the woman's thigh. Then give her an enema with tetrapharmacon ointment. For it will rot it after a few days and dissolve and come out.
But when it rots, a bad smell rises from it to the stomach and head and harms a weak person. Therefore, it is necessary that suitable fumigations be administered for this.
Some ancients, however, have already tried fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which a woman is fumigated during the retention of secundines and menses.
Let it be made of glass like an alembic, or of lead; and let the wide end be placed over the fire; and let the fumigation be placed on top of prunes; let her hold it until that fumigation is consumed; and repeat another.
Chapter LXXIX.
On the treatment of an unperforated anus.
Many boys are born with their anuses unperforated, which have already been sealed by a delicate suture. Therefore, the midwife must perforate it with her finger; and if not, she must perforate it with a sharp spatulum; and let her beware that the laceration does not touch it.
Then place wool soaked in wine and oil on top of it. Then heal it with ointments until it is healed.
But if you are afraid that it will be sealed, then place a lead cannula in the opening for many days and remove it when the boy wants to defecate.
And it sometimes happens that the anus is also sealed from the consolidation of a wound or an abscess. Therefore, it must be cut and then treated with what we have said from its treatment and lead.
Chapter LXXX.
On the treatment of fistulas which occur in the lower part.
Fistulas that occur in the lower part are nodulations and swellings that occur near the anus externally; or in the space of one part; and there is one fistula, or several.
When that nodulation becomes old, it opens, and watery moisture, white or thin pus, flows from it.
And sometimes these fistulas are penetrating. Therefore penetrating wounds are recognized by what comes out through the discharge, and flatulence, when the weak person uses the discharge; and perhaps a worm may come out of them.
And fistulas are from them when they are penetrating to the bladder, and as far as the urethra. And they are penetrating as far as the hip joint, and as far as the tailbone.
But by which a penetrating fistula to the anus is known, also from a non-penetrating one, is that you insert your index finger into the anus; and insert a slender probe into the fistula from metal, or iron: when there is no crookedness.
But if there is crookedness in it, then insert into it a slender probe from lead, or a horsehair, until you feel the probe, or hair on your finger.
But if you do not feel it thoroughly, nor does anything come out of the orifice from discharge, nor flatulence, nor a worm as I said; then know that it is non-penetrating: hurry therefore to treatment.
And when a fistula is penetrating to the bladder, or to the urethra; then its indication is urine exiting from it, and its prohibition from this so that the place may consolidate with medicines.
But if it is penetrating as far as the hip joint, or to the acetabulum; then its sign is that the probe reaches there, if there is no crookedness in it as far as the opening; and the discovery of pain in the surrounding area, and that pus always comes out from it; and that medication does not work on it, nor does it consolidate with ointment.
And in all these penetrating fistulas there is no cure at all: and the treatment of them is toil and vanity for him, from foolish physicians, upon whom it is performed.
But in that which is not penetrating, and not old, healing is hoped for with a cautery; according to what I tell you, and I have already proven it; and it is that the weak person lie between your hands on his back; and raise his legs up to above his hips, and let his hips be inclined toward his belly. Then insert a probe of lead, or air, if there is tortuosity in the fistula, until you know where the probe reaches.
But if he feels it weak around the anus, then it is necessary that you insert your index finger into the anus.
Therefore, if you feel the probe has already penetrated through itself, beyond which you feel between your finger and it, or flesh; then you will know for certain that it is penetrating; therefore do not labor in it, because it is not its cure, as we have said.
However, they said that the flesh is healed in some men, and from the medication from which help is expected, it is, to ignite a subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as preceded, and insert it ignited into the fistula until it reaches around the anus. Then repeat that twice, or three times, until you know that all those added filtered flesh, which are similar to a bird's quill, have already been burned.
Then treat it with linens wrapped in butter until those burned flesh come out; then treat it with ointments that generate flesh and consolidate.
Therefore if it heals, it is good.
And if not, then it never heals with any other treatment.
And if the probe comes out and does not reach your finger which is in the anus, and there is a thick membrane of flesh or sifac between it and the probe: and you see the fistula in that which follows the surface of the skin, then cut the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you will cut with the probe what is in the fistula until the cutting reaches where the extremity of the probe reaches, and the probe is freed and falls.
Then cleanse those filtered flesh which are assimilated to a bird's quill so that nothing remains from them.
If blood, however, overcomes you and dissolves the connection between you and your operation so that you cut those flesh parts: then it is better to do what is swifter and more helpful, to cauterize it with fire or with a sharp medicine.
Because cautery with fire brings together good qualities, burning of those added flesh parts, cessation of blood, and drying of humors.
Then care for it by wrapping it with linen soaked in butter or with crushed stalks until the place discharges pus and those burnt flesh parts go forth into the pus.
Then care for that wound with hardening ointments, producing hard flesh; and there are medicines in which are astringency and drying.
For when they are restored, then they are already healed, and you need not fear repetition.
But if the fistula has already reached as far as the depth of the anus and is elongated by excess body: then insert your finger into the anus and inquire with it.
If therefore you feel a test and between you and it there is a veil of linen or flesh and it is close to penetration: then there is no operation upon that except according to the way of trust and hope.
Which is because one of three ways is administered upon it, either to cauterize it itself as we said or to cut it until you reach its cavity so that it is possible for you to insert linen and healing from next to it. And do not proceed much with the cutting so that you do not fall into the muscle containing the anus and it happens upon a weak outcome of evacuation without will. Then care for it as we said.
Perhaps it will be healed or you lengthen the veil and clean it after you have dried it close to the anus as we said either with a probe or with another instrument of sharp extremity. Then clean those filtered flesh parts which are in the incision, as far as you can with careful examination.
Then try the restoration of the whole wound with the incision and the upper opening where it is consolidated; and a fistula will remain open on the inside part near the anus, and it will be easier for the sick person.
And sometimes a fistula is made in this way; and it is when you insert a probe into the fistula, which is on the side of the anus near the surface of the body with skin and the margin of the anus, then take a probe with a perforated end, which is like an awl, that is, prepared leather, according to this form. And insert into it a thread wrapped from five threads or so. Then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until it reaches its concavity.
If therefore it is penetrating into the inner margin of the anus nearby, then draw out the thread from that hole: so that you insert your finger into the anus and draw out the end of the thread, and join the two ends together: and tighten both, and leave it for one day or two days: and the more the thread falls into the flesh, tighten it well until those pieces of flesh between the two ends of the thread fall off; then care for the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating: then make it penetrate by any means that is prepared for you, unless it is very deep. For it is not fitting for you to do that because of tearing, so that you do not fall into it.
Then do with it as we said until it is healed.
The form of a sharp-pointed speculum with which the fistula is divided, whose curvature is very sharp and the other part is not sharp so that it does not fall into what is not necessary as you see.
Chapter Eighty-One.
On the suture of hemorrhoids, from which blood flows from their incision; and care for fissures.
There are hemorrhoids according to two types. For they are either within the anus, like bladders of charcoal or prunes; or as if they themselves are grains of a pomegranate. And from them there are small ones, and large ones: and blood flows from them always, and is one, and are many. And they are outside the anus, and at its extremities.
But those which are outside the anus are according to most few in moisture, from which runs watery fluid, or a little blood with constant flow; and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment of that which is within the anus, is that you order the sick person to strain; and it should be squeezed until the anus protrudes, and hemorrhoids appear to you. Therefore suspend them with hooks; or hold them with your fingernail. Then cut into them at their roots.
But if hooks do not hold them because of their moisture and softness; then take them with a rough cloth or a swab from double wool, and pull them out with your fingers. Then cut into them, and sprinkle over them after the incision certain hot powders so that they will serve as a cautery for them. Or cauterize them according to what preceded in the chapter on cauterization. Then care for them with the remaining treatment until they are healed.
But if the anus does not yield to protrusion, then give the sick person an enema in which there is a little mordant, so that it washes with what is in the anus, and yields to protrusion quickly when the sick person strains.
But if hemorrhoids are external from the anus, then their matter is light, easy; and it is as you take them with your fingernail or take them with a hook, and cut into them. Then care for them with what we have said until they are healed.
And whoever recoils from cutting with iron, then it is necessary that you administer a suture to them according to this method. Take an unraveled thread and insert it into the needle. Then draw the thread upwards through the needle and make it penetrate with the point at its root on one side; and wind the two ends of the thread around the lower part of the needle so that they are parallel to each other, and tighten the thread firmly with a strong knot. Then tie off the thread and remove the needle.
Do this with all the threads and leave one of them untied, so that excess blood may run from it.
Then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or carrot oil on top of the wound and put it over the area; and instruct the patient to rest. Then leave him until it falls off.
When therefore the threads fall off, care for them with ointments and the rest of the treatment until they are healed.
On the Treatment of Fissures. Very often they occur from drying of excrement and constriction of nature.
Therefore when they become chronic and medicine is not effective in them; then it is necessary that you scrape them with the point of a scalpel or with your fingernail until they become moist, and remove the top layer which prevents them from consolidating. Then care for them until they consolidate as is necessary.
But if they do not consolidate; then repeat them with a more vigorous scraping than the first until they bleed profusely and are flayed; then care for them until they are healed.
On the Treatment of Hemorrhoids, Both Inverted and Non-Inverted, and Threads, as Well as Ants.
Chapter Eighty-Two.
Know that a hemorrhoid is nothing but a round knot according to the color of the body, similar to the head of a nail; and it occurs throughout the entire body, especially in the lower parts of the feet and toes; and pain results from them upon walking.
Therefore it must be cut what is around the clavicle, and held with forceps or a hook, and eradicated from its root.
Then care for that; and if you wish, cauterize it according to what preceded in its chapter.
From the ash-tree however there is one small eminence, rough, filtered, round above the surface of the body. And it often happens in the hands of children.
And the treatment for it is, to extend the ash tree and cut it; or tie it with silk thread; or with a hair until it falls off. And if you wish, cauterize it according to what was previously mentioned with fire or with a sharp medicine; and now inverted ash trees are eradicated, and non-inverted ones with the instrument which I will say.
An ant however is also a small eminence, filtered, thick, above the surface of the body, extending deep; and when it finds cold, it feels like an ant bite therein, and this happens throughout the whole body; and most of it occurs in the hands.
And its treatment is, to take a cannula from a goose feather, or a vulture quill strong; and place that cannula upon the ant, until the circle of the cannula contains its parts. Then revolve your hand with the cannula until you cut what is around the ant; and place it deep into the flesh and eradicate the ant from its root.
And if you wish, do this with an air or iron cannula, according to this form.
Let the upper part of the cannula be a loose winding, drawing upwards, so that the apprehension thereof and its revolution is relieved upon the finger.
And if you wish, cauterize the ant according to what was previously mentioned in the cauterization of the ash tree in the chapter on cautery.
Chapter Eighty-Three.
Concerning the forms of instruments which are used for fistulas in diseases of the anus, and rupture of the abdomen, and colic.
Sometimes an enema is made of silver, or of brass, or of cast bronze, or hammered bronze.
And sometimes it is made of these instruments small and large, according to those in which they are administered.
Therefore, that which is administered in the healing of very young children should be small; and those whose anuses are weak, or painful, so also their enemas.
A large enema.
The tube of it, that is, the upper head in which the bladder is tied, should be wide according to this manner: and let there be a distinction so that the bladder is tied as you see, and its lower extremity which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt, that is, not open, smooth, very slender, drawing toward subtlety; and on one of its sides there shall be two holes, and on the other side one hole.
And let the width of the hole be according to the thickness of the rays, and a little thicker; and let the bladder in which the medicines are placed be from the bladder of an animal; or from sheepskin parchment, which shall be according to the form of a small wineskin: the root of which shall be one palm.
And let it be pierced with many holes as it is revolved, and the space which is between every hole shall be the thickness of a finger. Then insert into those holes a strong thread from raw silk, which shall be from ten threads or about that, and combine it with a bladder like that of a wineskin. When therefore the bladder is placed in it, tighten at the head of the enema between two distinctions with a strong constriction. Then administer the enema with it.
And this is the form of the circle of bladders here depicted, and the holes.
The quality of giving an enema with it is to fill a syringe or bladder with medicine that has been warmed according to the amount the sick person can tolerate; and be careful that it is not very hot nor very cold.
Then the sick person is laid on their back and raises their legs upwards; and put something under them, that is, leather on which people lie, or a sheet.
Then smear the end of the enema with oil, or with egg white, or with fenugreek mucilage, or something similar. Then gently insert it into the anus. Then let the attendant hold the syringe with both hands at the same time and squeeze it vigorously until all that is in the enema is emptied into the intestine.
Then remove the enema and let the sick person raise their legs up to the wall.
If the medicine compels them to defecate, then let them hold it as long as they can. And if they sleep with it all night, it is best for healing.
But if you give an enema to someone with abdominal swelling and they rush to defecate, then repeat the enema until they are healed.
But if there are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses in the anus, then let the enema be very mild and gentle, like the enemas given to children.
And this is the form of a delicate enema for when the skin is tight.
Chapter 84.
I have already said in the division on the treatment of wounds what was fitting for the book, and I will say here the treatment of them with the hand and with medicines according to complement.
Therefore I say that wounds are diversified according to what causes the wound and according to the place on which the wound falls.
Therefore, the things by which wounds are often made are like the throwing of a stone: or a cut with a sword, or knife; or a percussion with a spear, or wood, or arrow; and similar things from many objects.
But wounds which are made according to the locations of the body are, such as a wound which falls upon the head, or neck, or chest, or belly, or thigh; and similar ones from those limbs.
And I am stating the cures of some wounds, so that I may put that reasoning and rule over the other wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds; because the recollection of complex ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say. When a simple wound occurs on the head, and there is no bone fracture; then consider if it is from the throw of a stone, or similar things, and has already broken only the skin: and the wound is large, and you fear for an unfavorable outcome of hot abscesses; then hurry and perform cephalic phlebotomy immediately; and do not delay it; and extract blood from him according to the amount of his strength: if there is nothing prohibiting phlebotomy, especially if the blood that comes out from the wound is little. And let the phlebotomy be from the opposite side of the wounded part.
And let the phlebotomy be from the opposite side of the wounded part. And let the sick person beware of overeating, and wine, and heavy foods.
But if something prohibits reduction, then let him reduce from food, and not approach meats, nor wines.
And place upon the wound, if a hot abscess happens to him, cotton infused in rose oil alone, or with wine in which there is astringency.
But if you are safe from a hot abscess, then place upon the wound, if it is fresh with its own blood and the air has not yet changed it, powder which I will state later a little: and if the air has already changed it, then place some ointments upon it until it heals.
But if the wound is large, or is from a cut by a sword, and similar instruments, and its edges do not come together by themselves, then bring them together with suture, as I shall explain concerning wounds of the belly.
But if the wound is already separated from the bone, and hangs down, and there is no retention of it except by a small suspensory bandage: then cut it. Then treat the wound with medicines and restore hard flesh in place of the skin, and instruct the patient to eat foods which are nourishing, such as meat and cooked wheat, until he is fat; and those similar.
But if you find putrefaction in the skin and it does not adhere to the bone: then cut out all the putrefaction and discard it; then treat that area.
But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flows and it is not stopped by medicines, then examine the artery above. If therefore you find it uncut, then cut it with a scalpel or tie it off. But if necessity compels when that which we have said does not work, then burn it until the blood is stopped.
But if these wounds are small and simple, then their treatment is easy and light so that you sprinkle this powder over them: because it hardens them before the air changes them.
Method of Making Flesh-Colored Powder Take one part frankincense and two parts dragon's blood and three parts unquenched lime; grind the whole thoroughly and sift it. Fill the wound with this powder and constrict it well with a bandage until it adheres firmly to it and coagulates with the blood.
Then bind it over with bandages and leave it alone; do not unbind it until it remains so that it does not fester. For it is not eradicated by medicine until it is healed.
And sometimes lime alone does this when you do not have frankincense at hand, and dragon's blood also performs the same operation in many large wounds when it is fitting to place it upon them and bind, and they are recent wounds with their own blood which has not been altered by air.
But if it has already been altered by air, especially when it is in the summertime, then this powder is not intended for use; therefore treat it with what we said so that you place certain digestive ointments upon them; or place poultices of barley flour made with water and honey upon them until they discharge pus. Then treat them with the remaining care until they are healed.
But if it should happen that there is a fracture in the bone with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with forceps; and I will now speak of the treatment of skull fractures in what is to come.
Concerning wounds of the neck.
But if a wound should happen in the neck, then there is no difference in its treatment and that of a head wound when it is simple.
But if a nerve or artery of the neck has already been cut, then if it is a nerve, there is no remedy except to apply treatment that produces strong astringency, such as alum, and za'faran, and those similar to them. Because they are harmful to nerves and contract them.
And do not place anything cold at all upon the wound; because the substance of nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the most exalted of the members; and let that with which it is treated be from mild medicines, such as lime slaked with fresh water repeatedly infused with oil, or with rose oil, and tutty when it is washed even with fresh water: and the remaining mineral stones, in this manner, and humid ointments.
But if the wound is large, then apply a suture; or bring together its lips with poultices. Then care for it until it heals.
But if the wound has depth, or a sinus occurs in its lower part, in which pus has already collected, then perforate it in a more depressed place within it.
And if an artery has already been cut in the wound and its flow of blood has followed; then separate or dry it and bind it; or cauterize it if necessity compels it.
But if the spine of the throat has already fallen, or all of it, and its ligaments are saved; then join the lips of the skin with a suture over the trachea, and do not touch the throat, rather equalize it, and reduce it to its natural form. Then bind it with a decent constriction, and let it go for several days. Then care for it with ointments in which there is astringency and desiccation until it heals.
But if the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then explore it; then if there are bone fragments in it, extract all of them, or as many as you can from them; and what is not prepared, leave it until the wound putrifies, and separates and its egress alleviates.
But if the wound is recent, then sprinkle powder which I have described upon it. But if bone appears to be seen in the wound, and a fistula is formed; then care for it with that of which mention comes in its chapter.
Concerning a Wound on the Shoulder Blades
If there is a thrust by a spear or knife; and you see its depth, then consider. Therefore if windiness comes forth from the wound when a weak person breathes from it, then you will know that the wound is mortal.
If it is not deep and fresh with its own blood: then do not put powder on it in the first hour, nor bind it up, so that the blood may not be retained in its depth and return to the heart and kill the sick person: but put an attractive ointment on it and dissolve it twice a day.
But if you do not have ointment present, then put an old rag in the wound opening so that it may draw out what flows from it of moistures; and make the sick person sleep upon the wound so that what collects in it may run.
But if three or more days have already passed since the wound and no spasm occurs to the sick person, nor evil trembling of the heart, nor constriction in breathing, and you see that his other dispositions are good: then know that the wound is healed. Therefore care for it with washes and the rest of its treatment until it heals.
But if its healing is excused and it is always opened up, then know that a fistula has already been made. Therefore care for it from its own chapter.
And if a wound is from the incision of a sword or knife and it is simple on the surface of the chest or back, then care for it with what preceded from suture if it is large; or with powder if it is small.
But if it has already made an impression on the bone and chips come from it, then probe the wound and hurry to extract those chips if they are separate. But if they are not separate, then leave them until the wound rots; for their extraction is relieved then.
But judgment in the treatment of other accidental wounds in other limbs is the judgment that we said.
Of wounds of the belly and the exits of intestines and their outlets.
Disruption which happens to the abdomen is great, and medium, and small.
From a great one therefore sometimes an intestine, or a number of intestines, comes out.
Therefore the introduction of them is made, and their suture more vehement and difficult.
And a small disruption also becomes difficult in another way. It follows therefore that the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not hurry in their introduction to their place immediately: because it is inflated, opened, and enlarged: therefore its entry becomes difficult.
Because of this, therefore a medium disruption is better: because with it the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it becomes difficult in these two kinds.
Know that the suture of a vein is according to four methods.
Two sutures are common and apply to the suture of the abdomen, and to the suture of the remaining wounds of the body: and two other sutures properly pertain to the remaining wounds. However they are more proper with the suture of the abdomen: and I will tell you each one with explanation and declaration.
I say therefore that when a wound is small, and something comes out of it from the intestine, and it is difficult to reduce it: then it is because of one of two methods. Either because of the smallness of the disruption, as we said: Or because there is inflation in the intestine because of the cold of the air.
Therefore when it is so, it is necessary that you warm it, so that you immerse a sponge, or cloth dampened in lukewarm water only. Or you boil in water squints and cypress and saffron and embrace it with the intestine until inflation is resolved.
Sometimes wine in which there is astringency makes it: and it is better than water alone in the resolution of inflation.
When therefore you see the swelling already resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which has been boiled marshmallow or mallow. For through that its entry is eased with a small thing.
But if its return is excused after this treatment, then make a small incision in the disruption with an instrument by which hemorrhoids are cut.
And the first treatment is better when prepared than a section: and there is no compulsion to cut after necessity and defect of the instrument.
Let one part of it be twisted and pointed, and the other part not pointed, and let the fine end not be with the fineness of a spatula, but rather be a little blunter: and it is that which resembles a chisel, as you see.
When therefore the wound is enlarged and enters the intestine, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to its own natural form in its proper place if possible above it; for it is better.
But when the disruption is wide in the lower part of the belly: then it is necessary that you make the sick person lie on its back, and put their legs higher than their head. And if it is in the upper part of the belly, then put its head and chest higher than its lower parts.
And similarly if there is a disruption in one of the two parts of the belly, then put your attention and your consideration always on this, that the part in which the wound is be higher than the other part.
And thus it is necessary that you administer it in large wounds and in medium wounds.
But in small wounds, put it according to what is prepared for you.
Then make a pious minister be present between your hands who will hold the whole disruption with his hand: and join its lips. Then uncover from it for him who follows a suture something after something: and this is the manner of a common single suture.
And take a needle, or several needles, according to the size of the wound. Then let fall from the end of the disruption a quantity equal to the breadth of the ring finger, that is, a physician's breadth; and fix one needle beyond which you shall introduce a thread into both extremities of the skin, with both extremities of the sifac which is under the skin, until you make it penetrate from the other side, and you have now brought together two extremities of the skin, and two extremities of the sifac: and there are four rows.
Then bind with a double thread around the needle several times on both sides at once, until the two lips of the wound are joined together in a decent manner.
Then let fall a quantity equal to the breadth of a finger, and fix another needle in them; then draw it tight with thread, just as you did with the first needle. Therefore do not cease to do that with as many needles as you need until you complete the constriction of the whole wound.
And let the needles be of medium size between thinness and thickness; because very thin needles pierce the flesh quickly, and thick ones have a difficult entry into the skin; therefore it is necessary that they are of medium thinness and thickness.
And it is not necessary that the needle be fixed in the two extremities of the skin very close together; lest the flesh be pierced quickly and the wound opened before its healing, and lest they also be lengthened with the suture, lest the wound be prevented from healing.
Then cut off the ends of the needles so that they do not injure the sick man during his sleep; and put little wads of cloth on all sides to hold the ends of the needles; and leave them until you know that the wound is already healed.
And this indeed, a species of suture with needles thus arranged, is more suitable for small wounds. Because one, or two, or about that number of needles suffice in the suturing of them.
The second suture is common, so that you bring together the extremities of four with a suture: two extremities of skin and two extremities of fascia in one stitch, with a needle which has thread wound equally fine and thick.
Then when you have pierced these four extremities with the needle, draw back the needle from the part where you began, so that the drawn thread may fall from the upper part of the wound: let the suture be like the suture of cloth whereby cloths are tied, and put between every suture a quantity equal to the thickness of the little finger.
But men know this suture.
And with this suture I healed a wound which had happened to a man in his belly, who had been wounded with a knife and the disruption of the wound was greater than a palm; and about two palms had come out from the intestines from the middle intestine, and the disruption was in the middle of the belly.
I therefore returned it after his intestines had stood outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
The wound therefore became consolidated in the space of about fifteen days; and I cared for it and it was healed; and he lived afterward for many years, returning to his usual ways.
And the physicians had judged that it would not be healed.
And it was a marvel that I did not treat it with ointment. Because I was in a place where ointment was not to be found, nor anything of medicine. I therefore put old linen upon the wound twice a day and constantly washed it with honey water until it was healed.
But I will tell two kinds of sutures proper according to the telling of speech.
And it is, that you begin with a sharp suture; and insert the needle from the outer to the inner part.
When therefore the needle has penetrated the skin and gone into the muscle following the length and breadth of the whole body: let the extremity of the fascia fall on the side in which you inserted the needle, and make it penetrate into the other extremity from the inner part to the outer part at the other extremity.
When therefore you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate thus in the same extremity from the outer part to the inner: and let go the sifac extremity which is on this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from the inner part to the outer; and make it penetrate with the penetration that you make it penetrate into the sifac extremity which is in its part until it penetrates into the whole.
Then begin also from the same side and with its extremity which is from the sifac on the other side, and draw out the needle from the skin that it penetrated.
Then return it into that skin and its sifac extremity which is on the other side with this mirach extremity; and draw it out from the skin which is from its part, and do this alternately one by one, and another; and do this alternately after another until you have extracted all of its extrinsic parts according to that example.
And the sum of this suture is that its sutures be like those of skin layers; so that its sifac be alternately on one side with one extremity of skin; and that you let it go alternately on the other side, until you complete it.
The second kind of suture proper which Gale said.
This speech of his is narrated so that its suture be according to the likeness which some physicians make, so that they bring together every part to its corresponding fellow according to nature; and apply the sifac extremity to its other extremity, and the mirach extremity to its other extremity. And this is done according to what I tell you.
It is necessary that you fix the needle in the mirach extremity nearest to you from the outer part and make it penetrate to the inner in that alone; and let go the two sifac extremities. Then turn the needle and make it penetrate from the outer part to the inner in the two sifac extremities, namely on both sides.
Then turn both [instruments] over and make them penetrate from the inside to the outside, at two extremities of a pair of other forceps, which are on the opposite side.
And this method of suture is better than the common easy suture, and it is a suture of which remembrance preceded.
This is therefore also the speech of Galen.
And some have said. The suture of the belly is corrected with two needles. Which is, to insert one thread into both of them; and begin with the insertion of the needle, from that which is at your side, and make it penetrate up to the other side, according to the suture of those who are leather equally.
And know that when the disruption is in the middle of the belly, then its suture is more difficult than that of the remaining parts of the belly.
The judgment indeed of the medication of a wound, is the judgment of other wounds.
Which is, because when you attain a fresh wound with its own blood, before the air alters it; and you reduce the intestine, and its own, and fit it; then place powder of incarnating on top.
But if the air has already altered the wound, then place on it certain ointments which are present to you, until they make pus; and the threads fall away, and the sutures consolidate, and heal. Then care for it as is the care of other wounds, until it is healed.
But if medicines are not present to you, then place on it immediately, from when it begins to emit pus, old lint; and change it twice a day, as I have taught you, until it is healed.
For you do not need another medication in many dispositions, when wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound may communicate to the principal members in injury, then it is necessary that you immerse soft wool in oil of tempered warmth, or in rose oil; and place it around the parts which are between the groins, and under the armpits.
If he feels pain, or pricks, or putrefaction in his bowels (for this often happens) then give him an enema with strong black wine, warm: especially if the putrefaction has already reached the intestine and is about to penetrate as far as its cavity.
And know that what is from the large intestine is of easier healing: and what is from them out of the subtle, more difficult to heal.
But the intestine which is called Jejunum does not admit healing from a wound that happens in it at all: and this is because of its multitude, which is from veins, and their size, and because of the subtlety of its body, and the nearness of its nature to nerves.
But if that which proceeds from the wound is a protuberance, and you overtake it fresh: reduce it according to your reduction, by which you reduce intestines equally.
But if a space has passed it, and it has already become green or black: then it is necessary that you constrict it with thread above the place which has been blackened from it, so that a flow of blood does not happen. For in a protuberance are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament, and place two ends of the thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside it: so that relief comes upon you from its attraction, and extraction of it in case of a protuberance, and emission of pus from the wound.
A Reminder of a Wound That Happens in the Intestine.
When a rupture happens in the intestine, and it is small: then it is possible that it may be restored in some men: therefore because I have seen one who was wounded in his belly with a thrust of a lance, and the wound was from the right side of the stomach, and the wound became old: and a fistula was made, and there issued forth from it discharge, and flatulence.
Therefore I applied treatment until I was no longer anxious about its healing; nor did I cease to refine it, until it was healed and the site consolidated.
After I saw the site already consolidated, I feared for the patient, that some bad accident might befall him in his abdomen; and no such bad accident befell him from then on. And he remained in better dispositions, eating and drinking, and defecating, and entering the bath, and exercising himself in his diet.
And already some experimenters have said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and is small, then it ought to be tied according to this method. And it is, that you take ants of large heads. Then bring together the two lips of the wound, and place one ant from those which have an open mouth upon the two lips of the wound. When therefore its head is on them and it bites down with its mouth, cut off its head, for it will adhere and not be released.
Then place another ant near the first one, and do not cease doing this with an ant after an ant according to the total quantity of the wound.
Then reduce it, and its wound. For those heads will remain attached in the intestine until the intestine is nourished and healed, and no harm befall the patient deeply.
And already it is possible that the intestine may be tied even with a fine thread; which has been drawn out from the intestine of an animal, attached to it after it is inserted into a needle.
And it is, that you take the end of this thread from the intestine, and it should be scraped off very much. Then tie at its end a fine thread of flax wrapped around it. Then insert that thread into a needle and with it the intestine. Then put it back into its separation.
And this method of suture with ants and intestines is not except according to the way of trust and hope.
Know that a wound which is large, wide, especially if it is in one of the slender intestines: then there is no remedy except refinement, and its healing is not at all.
On the Care of Fistulas and Zuchemen.
Know that every wound or abscess when it grows old and becomes ancient, and becomes an ulcer and does not consolidate, and always discharges pus and is not cut off: then it is universally called a fistula, wherever it may be in the limb; and we call it Zuchemen.
And a fistula indeed is according to truth a filtered knot, hard, white: with which there is no pain and which has the concavity of a bird's feather: and because of that some call it Risati, that is, a feather.
And it is sometimes moist in certain hours, which discharges pus. And perhaps the moisture splits in certain hours. And sometimes this moisture is much, and sometimes little: and it is thick, and sometimes thin.
And I already stated previously in the division when I said wounds that every sore which does not heal and flesh is not born in it, it is not except because of one of nine new causes.
Of which one is, either because of the lack of blood in the body; or because of its malice; or because there is tough flesh between it and its upper lips, preventing the birth of flesh; or because there is much filth and squalor; or because the sore itself is putrid, and the material sent to it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is inconvenient in its healing; or because corruption falling in the region is a kind of pestilence; or through a property in the region, as happens in Caesaraugusta: in which digestion of illnesses is difficult and healing of abscesses by nature is delayed; or because there is one bone, or a number of bones in it.
And I have now shown all these causes and their signs, and their treatments with medicines in division; and it is necessary here that I make you know the treatment of Fistula and Zuken, which is done by the way of operation with the hand.
Therefore, know that Fistula occurs in all members of the body. For from them are Fistulas which reach the large veins and arteries, or nerves, or sinews: or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to one of the ribs: or to one of the vertebrae of the back, or to one of the joints composed in composition: such as the hand, and foot; and from them are those which go to the proximity of the principal member, and similar ones.
Which therefore of these Fistulas is according to this manner, is from illnesses difficult of healing, and does not receive healing, and occupation with it is toil and ignorance.
But if it is from Fistulas some of whose depth does not reach these places which I said: and you hope, and trust in its healing, and wish to arrive at the knowledge of it, then take a probe of bronze, or iron, if the Fistula extends according to straightness, and explore it with it.
But if there is crookedness in the Fistula, then investigate it with a probe of fine lead. For lead, with the gentleness of its body, is relieved, and curves around the crookedness.
But if the Fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to indicate upon it with a probe. Therefore wash out one of the openings from its openings.
For the moisture with which you wash it, goes towards the other openings, and runs out from them.
Then carefully inquire according to which manner it is possible for you: that you may know whether there is a bone, or nerve, and the Fistula's cavity is distant, or near: or whether the Fistula is one which has many openings, and stand over all of it, with your greatest strength: with questioning of yours, with which you question the sick person, and finding pain at compression with your hand upon the place, and similar things from signs and causes arising as an abscess.
Therefore, when you have stood upon all that true station, then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is, that you consider then, if there is a Fistula nearby apparent, or in a safe place far from the joint, or from a nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places which I told you: then cut the Fistula according to what was stated from my narration, and remove what is in it from filtration, and corrupted flesh, which arises in its orifice from flesh, or thelul, and similar things: and cure it, until it is healed.
But if the Fistula is of distant depth, and is according to straightness: then it is necessary that you cut it deeply as much as is possible for you. Then clean it from all its corrupted flesh.
Then apply linen wrapped in sharp medicines: and insert it up to the cavity of the Fistula which you comprehended with iron: do this several times with it until the sharp medicine eats away all that remains in the cavity of the Fistula from corruption.
Then restore it with ointments which generate healthy flesh, until it is healed.
But if it does not heal through that, then cauterize it according to what we narrated.
But if the cause of the Fistula is a bone, and it is certified to you: then inquire about it, and cut it according to what I narrated to you: if nothing prevents you from a vein, or nerve, or principal member, as we said.
If therefore the bone is revealed to you, and there is something of corruption and blackness in it: then scrape it, until all its corruption is removed. Then cure it with what makes it flesh again, until it is healed.
But if it does not heal and emits pus as it was doing: then know that you have not reached the total eradication of corruption.
Therefore uncover it a second time and make a careful incision into it, and cleanse it with your greatest care.
Then restore it. If then it heals, it is good; and if not, then know that the corruption is deep within the body, which you have not reached. Therefore there is no skill for you in it except to leave it to nature.
But if the mouth of a young child is corrupted, and it is possible for you, draw it out with fine forceps that are suitable for it.
But if there are many bones, then carefully draw them all out, and do not leave any of them with your strength.
But if something opposes you from the humors and there is no fear or mistake in their incision; then cut into those humors and flesh, if they are there, and free the bones.
But if you are not prepared to remove the bones in your time, then place over the wound something that will cause it to rot; and leave it until what is around those bones rots from flesh and humors.
And watch the wound so that it does not solidify. And constrict the section which you cut in your operation. Rather place over it, if you fear, a cloth immersed in sulfur ground with oil; or a cloth immersed in Egyptian ointment, or some green ointments.
For when those humors rot and separate from the bones, their removal is eased and their attraction.
But if there is one large bone, such as the bone of the leg or hip bone, and similar to them, and what is corrupted from it is a large part; then scrape it with the last incision until that blackness and corruption is removed. Then restore the wound.
But if what is corrupted in it is a large part and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then you must saw it and cut it entirely up to the place where the corruption reaches; then care for it until it heals together.
And I tell you a story that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take it as an example and help for your operation.
There was a young man about thirty years old, to whom came pain in his leg, from a cause which moved within him, that is, from his insides, until the materials reached his leg, and there formed a large abscess: and he had no external cause.
Time was extended with him in error of the physicians until the abscess was opened and many materials flowed forth with it. And his treatment was postponed until his leg became fistulous and many openings were made in it, which all emitted pus and the humors of the body.
A multitude of physicians treated him for about two years, and there was no one wise in the art of the hand among them, until I was called and I saw his leg and the materials which flowed from those openings with great force: even his whole body had already wasted away, and his color was citron.
Therefore I inserted a probe into one of the openings and it reached the bone.
Then I scrutinized all the openings, and I found that they reached one another from all parts of the leg.
I hastened and cut above one of those openings until I exposed a part of the bone; and I found it corrupted: which had already been corroded, blackened, putrefied, and perforated until it penetrated to the marrow.
Therefore I sawed away what was revealed to me, and prepared it from the corrupted bone.
And I judged that there was nothing in the bone except that corruption which I cut away and sawed. And now I had rooted it out.
Then I applied restoration to the wound with consolidating medicines for a long time. And it did not consolidate.
Then I probed and found above the bone a second opening above the first discovery; and I found continuous corruption with the bone, and I sawed what appeared to me also from that corruption.
Then I tried its restoration. And it was not restored.
Therefore I detected above it again and did not cease to cut the bone in sections and try its restoration; and it was not restored until I cut about a palm from the bone and extracted it with its marrow.
Then I restored it with medicines and it was quickly consolidated and healed; and this iteration was not necessary in its operation and section except because of the weakness of the infirm person's condition, and his lack of endurance, and my fear for him concerning death: because he suffered from evil syncopes due to excess evacuation every hour.
He was therefore healed with complete healing and firm flesh grew in the place of the bone; and a good arrangement was made in his body, and his strength returned; and he returned to his former condition, and did not cause him any hindrance in walking.
But if the prominent bone in the place of the body is already broken then it is necessary that you saw it according to this method: and it is as follows: take a bandage and bind it at the extremity of the prominent bone; and order someone to extend it upwards and put another bandage of thick wool upon the first bandage. Then bind it above the flesh which is under the bone and extend its extremity so that you draw the flesh downwards; and you expose the flesh above the place which you wish to saw, so that the saw does not injure the flesh.
Place wood or a board under the lower bone perpendicularly; because when you do this it is not prevented from cutting the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that the saw be above the corrupted place for a short time so that there is no corruption in the cavity of the bone; and it does not appear to the sense in its appearance, and compel the saw to its own vice.
If the mouth is corrupted and not prominent, but its part continues with a part; and the corruption is in the middle of it, or in a part of it, then expose the flesh from all sides entirely. Then put wood underneath.
Afterwards saw it from the first part, where the corruption is, until the saw continues from the other part; and let the saw be according to the length from the corruption a little, as we said.
But if the corruption is at the junction, cut the corrupted junction itself, and saw the mouth where it continues from the other part.
But if the corruption is in the continuation of two junctions, then there is no skill in it except abrasion.
But if the corruption is in the comb of the hand, or in the comb of the foot; then the matter in it is very difficult. But it is necessary that you inquire how the corruption appears to you. And abrade it, and clean it according to whatever arrangement is possible for you, and with whatever skill you are able to rectify it: when it does not cause opposition to you by vein, or nerve.
And know that cutting tools and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and subtlety, and magnitude, and smallness, and hardness, and rarity. Therefore it is necessary that you prepare an instrument suitable for each kind of operation.
And know that these operations signify to you above the species of instrument by which you need, when you have a long study. And the knowledge of the ways of this art is a testimony to the ways of illnesses; for then you will already find by yourself what suits it from the instruments for every infirmity.
And I affirm to you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you place examples upon which you cut, and the trial by which you experiment upon others.
Shape of another saw.
Shape of a scraper for joints. Let the head of this scraper be according to the shape of the head of a star-shaped nail: and its points let be according to the shape of the points of an elischetfegi.
And it is not fitting unless the heads of the joints are rubbed with it when they are corrupted or the mouth is wide and large.
Shape of a larger scraper.
Shape of a wide scraper.
Shape of a scraper in which there is concavity.
Shape of another subtle scraper.
Shape of another scraper of curved extremity.
Shape of a small, subtle, thin scraper.
This resembles a spoke, and its extremity is like a saw: it is exhibited in many places for the reason of bones.
Shape of a scraper which suits the reason of that which is perforated from bones.
Its extremity is triangular, and its extremities are pointed.
It is made from India. And similarly it is fitting that all which we have said be made from scrapers, and incisors, and saws.
Concerning the incision of extremities, and the locking of bones.
Extremities putrefy, either from an external or internal cause.
Therefore, when you have treated that corruption with medical treatment, and the treatment does not help; and you see the corruption fall upon a limb, which is unaffected by anything: then it is necessary that you cut into that limb until you reach the corruption, so that the weak person may be saved from death, or from the greater evil which is the loss of the limb.
And the sign of this happening is that the limb turns black, until it seems as though fire has burned it, or it rots after the blackness: until that rot reaches what follows that limb and spreads throughout the whole body.
Therefore, hasten with its incision, and similarly if the cause of the corruption is from the sting of certain venomous creatures: such as a sea scorpion, viper, lizard, and similar ones.
Therefore if the corruption or sting is at the end of a finger, then cut into the finger and do not allow space for the corruption to advance up to the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it happens in the hand, then cut it from the root of the focus, and do not allow space for the corruption until it reaches the focus of the arm.
And if it invades that, then cut the arm at the elbow in its joint.
But if the corruption passes through and you see it around the elbow, then there is death for the weak person in that. And besides this from treatment, there is the quantity of strength.
And do likewise with the foot, when the corruption invades a toe, then cut it at one of its knots; and if it reaches the arch of the foot, then cut off the whole foot. But if it ascends to the knee, then cut the leg at the knee joint.
But if the corruption has already reached above the knee, then there is no wisdom in it except dismissal and leaving the weak person to death.
The way to cut a limb, or sew it up, is to tie a ligature below the place you wish to cut, and another ligature above the place. Let one assistant extend the lower ligature downward and let another assistant extend the upper ligature upward. Then separate the flesh between the two ligatures with a broad spatula until all the flesh is exposed. Then cut or sew.
And it is necessary that you place a linen cloth over all the parts so that the saw does not touch the healthy area; and apply a warm poultice to the injured part.
But if internal bleeding occurs while you are working, then quickly cauterize the spot or place some powders that staunch bleeding over it. Then return to your treatment until it is complete.
Then bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage and care for it until it heals.
And I tell you that this same accident happened to a man on his foot.
For it happened that a blackness appeared on his foot, like a burn similar to fire: and that corruption first occurred on his toe until it began to spread throughout the whole foot.
The man therefore hurried to cut it away from himself after he saw the corruption spreading through his limb with its violence, as he found from the pain and burning: and he cut it at the joint and was healed.
And after a long time had passed, that same corruption happened to him on the index finger of his hand.
He therefore came to me and I tried to restore that excess with what I put on his hand from medicines after the cleansing of his body; and the excess was not repelled and began to spread into another finger until the corruption began to spread into his hand.
He therefore called me to cut off his hand; and I did not want to do it, hoping for a recovery from that excess on my part; and I also feared death for him at the cutting of his hand. For the man's strength was above the case.
And when he therefore despaired of me, he returned to his land; and there came to me news of him, that he hastened, and fell with his whole hand; and he was healed.
And I did not bring this account, except that it may be a help concerning that which falls upon the type of this disease; and that it may be a sign by which it is signified, and according to which it is acted.
Of the Treatment of Sinuses, and the Quality of Clysterization with Medicines.
When an abscess occurs in certain fleshy members, and the space of the abscess is prolonged, until it makes a collection of pus; then it breaks, or is perforated, and what is within it comes out as pus, and there remains an empty space as if it were a vessel; and the skin which is upon it, like a cloth which has already been thinned: and it does not proceed to its ultimate corruption, nor press into the mouth, nor into a nerve, nor into a ligament: it deserves to be called a Sinus; and not a Fistula; nevertheless if the space of it is prolonged until it presses the corruption into any one of these members, then it is called a Fistula, or zuken.
And the treatment of it is, that you cut all that skin as it revolves; and especially when it has been thinned, and made like cloth; and trust because it does not adhere to the place, on account of its corruption.
But if you hope that the skin will adhere, and the ultimate corruption does not follow from it; and if there is thickness in the skin from flesh, then treat it with a clyster; and it is, that you consider it as to the Sinus.
Then if it is large, and the pus which is emitted from it has a foul odor; then clysterize it with Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, and oil, and ziniar, taking equal parts, are gathered in a vessel: and they are decocted over fire until the medicine reddens; and it comes to the thickness of honey.
Then take from it what you need and dissolve it with water and honey, and inject it into the Sinus with an enema, and constrict its opening, and leave the medicine in it for the amount of two hours.
Then extract it with pressure; do this for as many days until the Sinus is cleansed and the stench is removed.
And sometimes it is enemaed with ash water, when this medicine is not present for you; and it is that you should take ash from vine wood or ash from holly wood; and pour water over it. Then strain it, and enema with it until you are confident that the Sinus has already been washed.
But if the sick person does not tolerate Egyptian medicine nor ash water, then enema them with water and honey to which some crushed ziniar has already been mixed. Or enema them with honey and wine mixed together, since it is the property of honey to cleanse and wash; and wine makes the Sinus adhere, especially when there is an excess of astringency and dryness in the wine.
When you do that several times, and are confident that the Sinus corruption has already been removed; then enema them with that which causes flesh to grow in it.
And it is that you should take some diafynicon plaster and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine; or enema them with certain medicines and other ointments, the properties of which I have written in the treatise on ointments.
But if the opening of the Sinus is tight, into which the enema cannula does not fit; then widen it a little with iron; or place in it licorice wrapped in Egyptian ointment, or in basil ointment until it widens.
And similarly if the opening is also wide; then bring together its lips with suture and let out from it the amount into which the enema can enter without addition.
And similarly if the opening from which pus flows is raised upwards: then cut it into a lower place within it so that the pus may flow downwards; for pus when constricted in the depth of a sinus prevents flesh from being generated there.
But if it is not possible for you to cut the sinus somewhat below it according as you wish: then endeavor to prepare the limb by preparation so that pus may flow from it with ease according as it is prepared for you. Endeavor that nothing of the pus be retained in it at all; and take consolidating medicines which are placed upon a sign, suitable to what you desire. And extend them upon linen cloth. And let the cloth be of such quantity that communication of the whole sinus may be made. Then cut with forceps a hole directly into the opening of the sinus, somewhat larger than the opening of the sinus. Then extend from soft ointments upon another cloth according to the quantity of the hole; and place it upon it at a distance from the opening of the sinus so that the flow of pus may be relieved therefrom; and do not remove the large cloth except after several days at once.
But that which is upon the opening of the sinus is that which you remove every hour so that what collects in it from pus may exit; and so that you may know whether that which flows from it is much or little; or digested or undigested.
And with this again consider the place of the sinus itself whether the master thereof feels pain in it, or there is no pain in it; and whether there is an abscess in it or not.
Therefore when your treatment is thus extended and you see the material which flows out upon the opening of the sinus; then know that the sinus already adheres or approaches adhesion; then therefore dissolve it in the morning or on the third day; and when you dissolve the wound, then change another cloth and renew the ointment.
But if after a long time a subtle virus comes out of the sinus, then do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is approaching, since there are people who delay the formation of flesh in their wounds, and some who act contrary to that.
But if after many days pus that is undigested comes out of the sinus, then you will know that the sinus does not adhere.
Therefore if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and its matter prolonged, then add to the drying medicines what physicians truly do, so that the medicines are humid in their substance and dry in their power: such as dyafinicon ointment, when an excess of zegi addition is added to it.
And from the best last treatment there is, take dyafinicon ointment and dissolve it with rose oil, and pour old wine equal to it in substance over it.
Then mix it with that, and use it.
And now honey acts similarly to this when you are not present with dyafinicon ointment, boil it until it thickens and use it. Or take myrrh and aloe and frankincense: grind the whole thing and sprinkle it on honey while it is over the fire. Then lay a cloth over it and bind it over the sinus; and smear it with honey which you have boiled until it has thickened and sprinkle spices over it, then place a cloth over it and bind it.
And sometimes long aristolochia is administered with roots of the celestial lily and lily; herb flour, and centaury. Use them simply or combined, grind them and sift them; then sprinkle them over the honey I have described and use it.
And if the matter of the sinus is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then know that there is corruption deep within it; or it is already making an impression on the bones, or in the remaining hard members, or ligaments: then cure it with a treatment for fistulas, according to what has been mentioned before.
On the treatment of whitlow and ingrown toenail, and cutting open a finger that has been added to it, and sectioning.
Whitlow is an abscess that arises under the nail of the thumb of the hand or foot, and perhaps it arises in the other fingers.
Therefore when the matter of it is prolonged and its cure is neglected, and it becomes inflamed with a hot abscess, or it is corrupted and discharges pus until it corrodes the root of the nail, and perhaps it corrupts it entirely, and perhaps the corruption reaches the bone until it has a foul odor, and the extremity of the finger becomes wide, and its color becomes dark.
Therefore when you treat it, as we said in the division, and your treatment does not succeed, then it is necessary that you cut with an iron all the excess that remains from the nail. Then cauterize the wound after that. For cautery is very beneficial.
But if the bone is healthy, and the nail is also healthy, and the empty additions of the nail already press the flesh inwards, and begin to prick it, and injure it: then it is necessary that you place a thin Radix under the angle of the nail which pricks the flesh, and push it upwards; and cut the flesh with ease, and put on it what remains of the flesh from burning medicines, corrosive ones until all of it is removed. Then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
But if the corruption has already pressed into the bone, then it is necessary that you cut open that bone and remove it; for it will never heal while a corrupted bone remains in it.
And if you see the corrosion and corruption advancing into the finger, then cut it at one node, according to what its previous remembrance has said. Then treat it until it is healed.
If however it should happen that a nail is rubbed or struck and there arises in it intense pain, then it is necessary first of all to let blood from the weakling. Then dry the nail with a sharp spatula and cut it transversely from above downwards.
And be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh which is under the nail for you will cause through that extreme pain to the weakling and it will be a cause of the addition of new flesh in the place.
Then treat the place with something that soothes pains.
But an added finger which is born in some men's hands, perhaps it is entirely fleshy and perhaps there are bones in some of them and perhaps there is a nail in it: and some of them are born at the root of the joint or its birth is in certain nodes of the finger. That therefore which is born in certain nodes of the finger does not move and that which is born at the joint of the finger perhaps moves.
Therefore the section of it which is fleshy is easy. That is, to cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
But the treatment of that whose birth is at the root of the joint is difficult. Therefore abstain from its incision.
But in that which is born in the finger at the last of the nodes then it is necessary first to cut its flesh with a round cut down to the bone. Then saw the bone with one of those saws suitable for it. Then treat it until it heals.
The consolidation which happens to fingers to each other very often happens either from the birth of man that is it is born with him or from the consolidation of a wound or burning by fire and similar things.
It is therefore necessary to cut that consolidation until the fingers return according to their natural form. Then place between them linen cloths, or rags soaked in rose oil: so that they do not consolidate quickly, and separate between them; or place between them a thin sheet of lead, until the place consolidates as it should.
And similarly if a consolidation should happen to certain fingers with the palm, then cut that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suits the shape of the limb.
Concerning the Incision of a Vice.
Varices are Veins enveloped, thick, full of superfluous melancholic humors which occur in many members of the body: and their most frequent occurrence is in the legs, especially in the legs of those who travel, work, and carry burdens.
Therefore it is necessary that you administer a shaking of the body from black bile frequently with vigorous shaking.
Then phlebotomy for the patient, letting blood from the basilic vein.
The cure of them with iron is according to two methods. One of them is that they be cut, and black blood be extracted. And the other method is that the Vein be raised and entirely extracted.
The cutting of it, however, is according to this method: First embrocate the leg with much hot water until the thick feculent blood is resolved. Then bind the infirm person's leg from the upper part of their hip to the lower part of their knee with a bandage. Then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a wide incision.
Then raise it up, that is, draw out the blood into your hand from the lower part of the leg upward; and from the upper part the phlebotomist must first phlebotomize the infirm person. Then cut with the instrument as far down as needed, until a quantity of blood comes out which you see is sufficient and which the strength of the infirm person can bear.
Then bind it and order him to abstain from foods that produce black bile; and repeat evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and it harms the sick person.
The elevation of this is according to this method. Shave the leg of the sick person, if there are many hairs on it. Then introduce him into a bath; or embrocate him on his leg with hot water until it reddens and the veins swell out; or he is exercised with strenuous exercise, if a bath is not present for him, until the limb is heated.
Then dry the skin directly on the vein section lengthwise; or at its last part near the knee, or in its lower part near the heel.
Then open the skin with hooks and expose the vein from all sides until it appears to the senses; and at its appearance, you see it reddish towards a dusky decline. When therefore it emerges from the skin, you see it white as if it were a cord.
Then introduce a Radix beneath it until it is raised and emerges from the skin; suspend it with a blind hook, gentle.
Then dry another section near that section by three fingers. Then expose the skin from above the vein until it appears. Then raise it with Radixes as you did and suspend it with another hook, as you did at first.
Then dry another section, or several sections, if necessary for that. Then raise and cut it with the last section near the heel.
Then extract it to the section which is above it.
And do that until you extract it from the higher section, or all the higher sections, until it emerges completely; then cut it.
But if it does not obey you in being extracted and raised; then introduce a needle with a strong double thread and tie it and extract it; or introduce a Radix beneath it and revolve your hand to all sides until it emerges. And beware, lest it fall. For if it falls, it will be difficult for you to raise it up greatly, and harm comes upon the weak one from it.
Therefore when you have extracted it entirely, then place wool soaked in wine and rose oil, or oil upon the place of the wound, and tend to it until it heals.
But if the Vine is contracted, having a twist with an involution to its parts, and it is not as we said according to straightness: then it is necessary that you cut upon it at every part of its twist, and its places of involution.
Then suspend it with hooks until you raise it entirely and beware at your section upon it lest you fall upon a vein, or wound it: for it will become difficult for you to raise or extract it. Therefore preserve your prudence.
The Form of the Falling Vine, How It Is Healed.
The Form of a Blind Vine.
It does not have a curvature like the other Hooks, nor is it of an acute point so that it would not wound a vein and it is of a thick, gentle flexuousness: for if it were slender, it would fall upon the vein by its slenderness: rather let it have excessive thickness as we said.
On the Extraction of a Leg Vein.
This Vein is generated in the legs in hot lands, such as Alizegi and the land of the Arabs, and in dry, hot lands of little tenderness, that is, those in which neither herb nor tree is born.
And perhaps it is generated in other places of the body besides the legs.
And its generation is indeed from the putrefaction that happens under the skin, just as it happens within bodies of serpents and ascaris worms, and worms generated between the skin and flesh.
The mark of the beginning of this event of the Vein is a vehement inflammation which occurs in the leg. Then the place blisters. Then the Vein begins to come out from the place of that blistering, as if it were the root of a plant, or an animal.
Therefore when its extremity appears from it, it is necessary that you envelop upon it a piece of lead, whose weight is from one scruple to two and bind it: and let the lead hang suspended from the leg.
Whenever therefore anything issues from it to the outside, envelop that in the lead and bind it. And if it is prolonged much, then cut a part of it and envelop the remainder. And do not cut it entirely before it issues forth altogether. For if you cut it, it contracts and enters into the flesh: and it causes an abscess to occur, and putrefaction in the place, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore it is necessary that it be gently handled and drawn out gradually until it issues forth from its last part, and nothing remains of it in the body: and from this indeed Vein there issues forth in some men what is five palms and ten in length. And now it has come to me that it issued forth from a man of twenty palms.
But if it happens to you in the hour of your medication: then insert a ray into its hole and pierce it with a long hole through the body until all that is in it of matter is evacuated: and administer putrefaction of the place with medicines for several days. Then care for it with the treatment of abscesses.
And this indeed Vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot, or in the foot itself: and there are many openings to it, and a branch issues forth from every opening.
Therefore care for it, as we said in the division, and with that which has been stated before.
On the Section of Worms Bred Under the Skin, and It Is Called the Disease Bouina.
This ailment is called in a certain land among us the bovine disease: because it very often happens to oxen, and it is a small worm, which is born between the skin and flesh.
And it wanders throughout the whole body, ascending and descending: and it is shown to the senses during its movement from limb to limb, until it bursts wherever it bursts in the skin, and comes out.
And its generation is from the putrefaction of certain humors. Just as worms and snakes happen, that is, earthworms, and roundworms in the belly.
And it is feared because of its harmfulness. Because when it wanders in the body, and rises to the head, and reaches a place: then perhaps it opens up there, and comes out, and destroys the eye: and that happens very often.
Therefore when you wish to cure it, and extract it, then it is not done except at its movement, and appearance to the senses.
It is necessary therefore that you bind what is above it, and what is below it with a strong constriction ligature. Then cut above it, and extract it.
But if it burrows into the flesh, and you do not find it: then apply a cautery with fire upon the place, until it dies.
And the greater thing that is feared is its corruption, by which it corrupts the eye, as we said.
But if you see it has already reached the head near the eye, then bind a good constriction under it above the eyebrow. Then dry it over itself and pull it out.
And it is necessary that the sick person use purification of his body with medicines dissolving foul bad humors.
And let him beware of foods producing putrefaction.
Concerning the incision for the ailment Nakir.
This ailment is called in our land Nakir, and it is a pain that occurs in certain members; then it is transformed from member to member.
And I myself have indeed already seen it, according as I relate to you. I was summoned to a sick woman in certain ulcers. And she exposed her arm and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the cord of the arm.
And after I remained for one hour, I saw one swelling advance with a hiss, just as a worm advances, ascending to her shoulder faster than it is possible; so that it be like quicksilver, when it runs from place to place.
Therefore the pain withdrew from that place and was fixed in the shoulder.
Then I sat for one hour, and it ran through the rest of the body until it reached the other arm.
Then she narrated to me that it revolved throughout her whole body, according as I saw.
Therefore I marveled at the speed of its transformation from member to member. And I myself had not seen this ailment with my own eyes in this way before. Nevertheless I have seen many who find pain transformed from member to member; and I have not seen it with my own eyes as I saw it in the woman.
And I do not think it to be anything other than because the woman was one of those with dry bodies and exposed veins; therefore this windiness transformed appears to the senses.
And it is necessary that they not appear according to this method in those who are delicate and with moist bodies, hidden veins.
Therefore when you wish its cure and the patient feels that pain: then if it is apparent to your eye as we said, then constrict above it and beneath it quickly: and cut above it until that wind comes out constricted: and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it with your own eyes: then treat it with shaking of the body and with that which expels winds and drives them out with foul-smelling pills, and pills of pellitory and the like.
On the Extraction of Arrows.
Arrows are diversified according to their kinds and according to the places in which they fall from the body.
Their diversity indeed is: because of them there are those which have large points and small points: and concave ones, and deaf ones. And of them there are those which have three angles. And of them there are those which have tongues. And of them there are those which have stars.
Those indeed which are according to the limbs in which they fall, are according to two ways. For either the limbs are from principal concave limbs such as the brain and heart and liver and lung and kidneys and intestines and bladder and those similar to them. Therefore when it falls into any of these limbs and the signs of death appear to you which I shall tell you afterwards: then it is necessary that you avoid the extraction of that arrow from them for death follows him in whom it is in many dispositions. And when these evil signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not concealed in the depth of the limb, then extract it and care for the wound.
For when an arrow falls into the brain and penetrates the mouth and exits through the siphac which is above the brain, the following occur: violent headache, dimness of vision, vertigo, redness in the eyes, swelling, redness of the tongue, spasm, confusion of mind, and vomiting of bile. And perhaps blood flows from the nostrils or ears. And perhaps speech is cut off and the voice is destroyed. And moisture white like pulp exits from the place of the wound. And there exits from it something similar to the wateriness of flesh.
Therefore, if these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment and extract the arrow if it does not exit.
The signs of an arrow when it falls into the heart are that it is near the left nipple and he feels as if it is fixed in a hard thing, not in a hollow thing. And perhaps there is motion of the arrow similar to the motion of the pulse and black blood runs from the wound. And following that is coldness of the extremities, cold sweat, and fainting. Know therefore that death descends without doubt.
And the sign of an arrow when it has wounded the lung is the exit of frothy blood from the wound and the vessels which follow the neck become inflamed and the color of the sick person changes. And he breathes out a great, deep breath and seeks the attraction of cold air.
But if the arrow should fall into the veil which is in the chest, then it is near the small ribs and there is great panting with violent pain accompanied by sighing and all the limbs of the shoulders are moved.
And if an arrow should fall into the stomach, then perhaps undigested food will come out from the wound.
And if an arrow should fall into the belly and lodge there: dung will come out from the wound, or phlegm, or intestine which has already been ruptured. Therefore there is no hope in its cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if an arrow should fall into the bladder and urine comes out: and something proceeds from it to the outside, and the pain is stronger upon the sick person: then you know that it is mortal.
But the remaining limbs, such as the face and neck, and throat, and shoulder blade, and armpit, and spine, and clavicle, and thigh, and leg, and those similar limbs are saved according to many arrangements: when the arrow does not find an artery or nerve: and the arrow is not poisonous.
And I tell you what I have seen about these arrows so that you may know through it concerning your treatment.
Which is, because to a certain man an arrow fell into the tear duct of his eye, at the root of the nose. Therefore I extracted it from him on the other side under the fat of his ear and he was healed and no harm befell his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which had fallen to him in the fat of his eye under the lower eyelid and the arrow was already hidden and I did not obtain from it except a small portion of its end with which it adhered to its wood and it was a large arrow from the arrows of Turkish bows, with mild iron, in which there are no ears.
Therefore the Jew was healed and no bad accident befell his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And it was an Arabic arrow, and it is that which has ears. Therefore, I placed it upon her between two guides, and now it was submerged in her throat. So I dealt carefully with it until I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man which had fallen into his belly, and we thought that he would die from it.
Therefore, after thirty days had passed him and nothing changed in his condition, I placed myself over the arrow, and I contrived upon it, and extracted it; and he was healed, and no bad thing happened to him.
And I saw a man to whom an arrow had fallen on his back, and the wound had become consolidated over it. Therefore, after seven years, the arrow came out at the root of his hip.
And I saw a woman to whom an arrow had fallen in her belly, and the wound became consolidated over it, and the arrow remained inside her; and nothing changed in her condition, and the woman did not find harm from it in any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow had fallen on his face, and the wound became consolidated, and it remained, not finding him much pain; and similar things to these, many.
And I extracted an arrow from a man of the King's princes, which had fallen to him in the middle of his nose, and it had already declined towards the right side a little, and the whole arrow was hidden.
Therefore, I was called to cure him after the fall of the arrow for up to three days. I found therefore the wound of the arrow very tight.
Therefore I sought it with a subtle touch and did not feel it; and he himself found a prickling and pain under his right ear. I therefore hoped that it was that prickling from the extremity of the arrow.
Therefore I plastered the place with a plaster in which there was attractive and digestive power, confident within myself that the place would be poulticed, and a sign of an arrow would appear to me, so that I might cut above it: and nothing happened in the place indicating that the arrow had reached the place.
Therefore I persevered with the plaster upon it for many days, and nothing happened, and meanwhile the wound became consolidated: and he remained weak from its extraction for a space of days until he felt the arrow one day within his nose. And he related that to me.
And he related that to me. Therefore I placed upon that wound a sharp, corrosive medicine for many days until it opened: and when I tried, I touched it and felt the slender extremity of the arrow adhering in the wood.
Then I added to the opening of the wound through that sharp medicine until the extremity of the arrow appeared visibly to us: and it passed for me with him a space of time of about four months.
Then after the wound was enlarged and it was possible for me to introduce forceps into it and move it and it did not obey the exit: then I did not cease to refine and contrive upon it with ways of ingenuity until I began upon it one day with forceps well made, according to as their form will come at the end of this chapter, until I extracted it. Then I restored the wound.
And physicians indeed judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored. Therefore I restored it, and the wound became consolidated and he was healed with perfect health: and nothing harmed him at all.
And I relate to you the quality of the extraction of certain arrows so that you might place that rule and meaning upon it of what I did not say.
For the parts of this art and their distinctions are not comprehended with narration: nor does that book comprehend it, and a prudent craftsman compares with a little upon much: and with what is present, upon what is absent: and he finds a new operation and a new instrument among the descents of foreign things of this art when they happen.
Therefore, I say that arrows do not exit the limbs in which they are fixed except according to two modes. Or by attraction from the place from which it entered. Or by the contrary of the other side.
And that which exits where it entered is either an arrow proceeding in a fleshy place and is attracted and exits.
But if it does not yield to exit at the hour in which it falls, then it is necessary that you dismiss it for several days until the flesh around it putrefies and its attraction is relieved and its exit.
And similarly if it is fixed in bone and does not yield to you for exit, then dismiss it also for several days and repeat it with attraction and motion every day until it exits.
But if it does not yield to you for exit after those days, then it is necessary that you perforate around the arrow in the bone itself from every side with a fine awl until the arrow is enlarged. Then attract it and extract it.
But if the arrow is already concealed in a place of the body and is hidden from sensation, then inquire for it with touch. If, however, you feel it, then draw it out with certain instruments which are suitable for its extraction.
But if you are not able to get hold of it because of the constriction of the wound and because of the length of the arrow in depth; and there is neither a bone nor a nerve nor a vein there: then cut down upon it until the wound is enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
But if it has ears by which to be held, then free the flesh fixed in them from every side with all the ingenuity you can do that, and ingenuity, if it is not possible to get past the flesh in the fracture of the ears and the twisting thereof until it comes out.
And when you administer the extraction of an arrow, in whatever place it is, then use the twisting of your hand with forceps to all sides until you make it come out; and subtle subtlety at the last so that the arrow is not broken and its attraction becomes difficult for you, and its extraction.
But if you are not able to get it out within an hour, then leave it for several days until those which are around it become putrid. Then repeat it for the tension will be relieved. But if the flow of blood causes you opposition then administer what we said from healing in its chapter; and guard your strength from cutting a vein or a nerve or a cord.
And administer ingenuity in every way possible to you for the avoidance of the arrow; and let it be with ease and quietude, or slowness, and firmness as I have told you.
And it is necessary, that you make when you draw out the arrow, so that it be weak according to the figure according to which it was at the case of the arrow itself. For it is more beneficial. But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you from the figures.
But the arrow which comes out from the opposite side, or already proceeds from it something to the exterior; or makes a hump at the extremity of the arrow by feeling from the upper part of the nearby skin and you see it prominent: cut then upon it, and let the incision be according to the amount that the forceps can grasp in it.
Then draw it out; for it itself becomes easy to remove.
But if it is retained in the bone, then twist your hand according to the roundness, until the arrow presses into the bone and enlarges itself; then draw it out.
And if not, leave it for several days; then repeat the process until it comes out.
But if the wood of the arrow is in it, then drive it in with that.
But if the wood has fallen out and you wish to administer a thrust, then insert a concave instrument into it, so that its concavity enters the tail of the arrow; then drive it with that.
But if the arrow is concave, then drive it with an instrument entering into it. For the arrow is relieved by that.
But if the arrow is poisoned, it is necessary that you scoop out all the flesh in which the poison is, if it is possible for you to do so. Then treat it with what is suitable for that.
But if the arrow falls into the chest, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side: and it is nearby from what you touch with your hand, and it is possible for you to cut above it: then cut, and be cautious of incision of a vein, or nerve, and draw it out.
Then sew the wound if you see fit, and treat it until it heals.
And this is the form of forceps with which arrows are extracted.
Let the extremities be like a bird's beak, which are made like iron; when they grasp upon the arrow, they do not release it.
And many kinds are made from them, large, small, and medium, according to the quantity, magnitude of the arrow, its scantiness, and the width of the wound and its tightness.
The shape of the speculum is concave.
And the shape of the sound probe is blunt.
This is the extremity of the sound probe like a rod so that its entry is eased into the concave speculum and it is driven in with it.
Concerning the Phlebotomy of Veins.
The veins to be phlebotomized, the ones which customarily run in the body, are thirty.
Of these, there are sixteen in the head: two pulsatile veins which are behind the ears called the two Herbs; and two arteries which are apparent in the two temples; and two veins which are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, which are called Lookers; and a prepared vein in the middle of the forehead; and a vein which is at the extremity of the nose. And two Guidegis which are in the neck. And two veins which are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins which are in the lower lip. And these are the veins which are called Algecherich. And two veins which are under the tongue.
But the veins which are phlebotomized in the arms are five veins in each arm.
One of them is the Cephalic and it is from the sylvan side and common people call it the head vein. And the Fusca. And it is the Middle vein and it is composed of a branch of the Basilic and a branch of the Cephalic; and common people call it the body vein. And the Basilic, which is located on the domestic side and is also called the Titillaris. And the common people call it the vein of the belly. And the cord of the arm, and it is placed above the elbow; and it is that in which one performs bloodletting, and it is that which appears above the thumb with a manifest protrusion.
And the Little Savior; and it is a vein that is between the annular and the little finger; and it has two branches.
And in the leg and foot there are three veins. One of them is that which is under the curvature of the thumb from the outer side. And the second is the Saphenous; and its location is at the heel from the inner side. And the Nessi vein; and its location is at the heel from the outer side.
And in the other leg there are three veins similar to those.
Concerning bloodletting from two veins behind the ears.
Bloodletting indeed from the two veins that are behind the ears is beneficial for old catarrhs, and hemiplegia, and epilepsy, and ancient evil ulcers of the head.
And the quality of bloodletting from them is according to what I relate. And it is that the head of the sick person is shaved; and their occiput is rubbed in the place of the two veins with a rough cloth, good rubbing. Then let the sick person bind their neck with a bandage until two veins appear. And their locations are behind the ears in two depressions of the head. Therefore seek them with your finger, and where you feel their pulse under your finger, mark there with a hot iron.
Then take a phlebotomy knife, and it is that which is called Inciding. Then insert it under the vein into the skin until the phlebotomist reaches the bone. Then raise your hand with the vein and skin upward, and cut into the vein with the skin with an incidental incision. The length of the incision should be the amount of two joined fingers, or thereabouts; and let as much blood flow out as you wish.
Then bind it with lint, and leave it until it heals.
And now at the beginning of the book incision and cautery of these have preceded.
Indeed, bloodletting from the two arteries in the temples is beneficial for chronic headache, and for gout, and for habitual ophthalmia, and for the course of acute effusions flowing to the eyes.
And the quality of bloodletting from them is according as I tell you. Let the weak person bend their neck much until two veins appear clearly to the senses, and let their pulse be demonstrated under your finger. Then mark them with hot cautery.
Then raise the skin above the vein with your index finger and insert the lancet beneath it, raising the vein upwards. And cut into it as you did with the other two veins; and let the blood flow out according to your need.
Then release the pressure on the weak person's arm and place your finger upon the vein for an hour. Afterwards place a bandage and lint upon it and bind it tightly from above; and leave it until it heals.
And now the recollection of these, and their incision, and their extraction have preceded at the beginning of the book.
Indeed, bloodletting from the vein in the forehead is beneficial after bloodletting from the cephalic vein for old facial ailments; and for headache, and redness; and foul ulcers.
And the quality of its bloodletting is as I tell you. The weak person ties their neck with a tourniquet until a vein appears. Then take the instrument called a lancet.
Place the prominent point which is on the head of the lancet upon the vein itself and strike it with a pestle or some other thing in this manner; and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you wish. Then loosen the constriction of the weak person and bind it until it heals.
And sometimes it is opened with a wide bloodletting. However, it must not be of a pointed extremity, like the other bloodlettings, but rather of a wide extremity. And let the bloodletting be across it, because the mouth is nearby and perhaps the lancet will break when it is slender.
But the benefit of the two veins which are in the two lacrimal glands of the two eyes is for the eye from scab and redness; and swelling in the eye and illnesses of the face.
And the quality of their bloodletting is that the weak person ties their neck with a tourniquet. Then let them be bled; and you stand above their head.
And let the bloodletting be across according to a small length with a small lancet, slightly wide, for there is no flesh in that place. For if the lancet is of a slender extremity it may perhaps break.
Then let as much blood run out as is necessary for you. And place a compress over them and bind them one night and loosen them.
Phlebotomy of the veins of the nose is indicated for acute fever, and violent headache, and facial ailments such as hemiplegia, and redness which occurs on the face; especially when it is longstanding.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is such that the weak person should constrict their own neck. Then hold their nose with your left hand and take a thin, long phlebotomy instrument; and fix it in the middle of the nostril itself, between that which divides the nose according to its straightness. For the vein does not appear to the sense there, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary that you hold your hand with the phlebotomy instrument for a little while; and let the blood run according to your need. Then bind it with one ligature at night. For it restores itself quickly.
Indeed the benefit of phlebotomy of the two temples is for constriction of breathing and the beginning of leprosy and melancholic ailments and impetigo and bad ulcers and corrosive ones, that is, summer boils.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is such that the weak person should bind under both temples on their neck with a bandage; and the practitioner should stand over the head of the weak person, and the weak person should be sitting on a seat.
Then the phlebotomy instrument cuts the vein lengthwise for a short time. Then extract a temperate amount of blood, or according to that which you see is necessary for it. Then do similarly with the other vein.
Afterwards loosen the bandage and constrict the two veins in the middle; so that the weak person does not become feverish. And let it be until morning. For the wound heals.
Concerning the Phlebotomy of Veins by Algeberich. Veins however are helpful for phlebotomy according to Algeberich: because they contribute to alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gum; and bad ulcers: and fissures of the lips, and bad ulcers, even those which are in the nose, and around it.
And the quality of their phlebotomy is that you make the weak person sit before you: and constrict his neck with a band. Then turn back his lip and look at the two veins: of which one is on the right of the lip, and the second on the left: and the demonstration of both is through the blackness of both. And this is true: because around them are small, black veins. Therefore incise both with an intersecting incision.
But if there is doubt upon you and you do not know which one it is: then attend to the incision of the larger one, and the more manifest one.
And do likewise with the two veins that are on the upper lip: and indeed most often this is done with it: and incise the two veins that are on the lower lip.
Concerning Phlebotomy of the Vein under the Tongue after Phlebotomy of the Cephalic Vein. Indeed the phlebotomy of the two veins that are under the tongue is helpful for: phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is for inflammations that are in the throat and pain of the uvula and pains of the mouth.
And the quality of their phlebotomy is that the weak person sits between your hands before the sun: and elevate his tongue, and look under his tongue on one side for a vein, and on the other side for a vein: and the color of both tends towards blackness.
Therefore phlebotomize both: and take care that you do not put your hand into them while phlebotomizing. For under it are arteries, and perhaps blood flow may occur from those arteries.
However, there are three veins in the elbow which are phlebotomized, and the practice of phlebotomy occurs in these in all people.
And phlebotomy of them is performed according to two methods. Either by puncturing with a broad myrtle phlebotomy knife; or an olive-wood one sharpened to a point; or by cutting with a surgical knife, and it is called Alnesil. And this is its form.
And among them are broad and fine ones according to the width of the veins and their firmness. The myrtle phlebotomy knife is broad, as you see. And it is suitable for opening concave veins, full ones, those coming forth, apparent, large, and those which contain thick, cloudy blood.
And this phlebotomy knife is of lesser width and with a finer point.
And it is suitable for phlebotomy of fine veins which contain thin, yellow blood
The Basilic vein, which is one of these three veins, is favorable for phlebotomy. Because it draws blood from illnesses which are under the throat and neck, from that which follows the chest and abdomen; and it behooves the phlebotomist to take care when phlebotomizing it, and to be fearful of the artery beneath it, for an artery is situated underneath. Therefore if he errs and adds to the puncture during phlebotomy, he will strike that artery and blood flow will occur. Therefore it is necessary for the phlebotomist not to puncture the Basilic vein with a puncturing phlebotomy knife but rather to cut it with an Alnesil.
If the basilic vein does not appear clearly, then it is necessary that someone else expose it and change its position to another one, or seek another branch of it; or use a phlebotome in place of it on the arm. For it itself is manifest and cut it with the phlebotome Anesil as we have said.
But if you wish to perform phlebotomy on it itself then it is necessary before the constriction of the arm that you touch the place until you recognize the place of the pulse. Then mark the place with a cautery, afterwards constrict the arm, and cut the vein with a concave incision with the phlebotome Anesil as we have said. And be careful that percussion does not fall through the space from the place of the artery.
And when you see, as you are tightening the ligature, swelling in the place that you marked with a cautery, then that swelling is the swelling of an artery; therefore avoid it.
For if you see the blood rise at the phlebotomy like the urine of a child and it is thin, reddish blood; then know that it is from arterial blood. Then hasten, and place your finger over the long space, then remove your finger. If the bleeding is cut off (for it often is) then constrict the arm and release it; and let the weak person be warned against movement; and let there be fear over them.
And let them not move for several days until they are healed.
But if the bleeding is not cut off and overcomes you and there is no medicine present to you at that moment then cut into the artery if it appears to you. For its extremities are contracted and the blood is cut off.
Or take the bark of a pistachio nut and grind it; take one half and constrict it over the place of the vein with a decent constriction, with a ligature and poultices up to another day.
Then if blood is shed, it is good. And if not: then care for it with him whose memory preceded from the place of the powders cutting off the flow of blood: and the incision of his blood is not difficult in many positions, because of the small place of the wound, and the possibility of a ligature from the arm.
The phlebotomy of the Basilic vein is beneficial because it draws blood from both the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; therefore, because it is composed of a branch of the Basilica and a branch of the Cephalica, as we have said.
And it behooves the phlebotomist to be above fear from its phlebotomy, for beneath it is a nerve. If therefore he adds in the puncture of the phlebotomy, and finds a nerve, numbness occurs in it, and healing becomes difficult, and perhaps it does not heal completely.
And this nerve often appears to the senses. But if it is hidden in some people and is subtle and does not show: then it is necessary that you place your phlebotomy where the phlebotomist cuts a section with Alnesil, and avoids the nerves with your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then find the vein in length.
On the Cephalic Vein. The phlebotomy of the Cephalic vein is beneficial because it draws blood from the head and contributes to eye diseases.
And it is necessary in this vein especially if you wish, that the phlebotomist punctures it with an olive phlebotome or a myrtle phlebotome; because it is the safest of all veins, since there is neither an artery nor a nerve beneath it.
However, it behooves you at the time of phlebotomy to avoid with the phlebotome only the head of the lizard, and seek a gentler spot; and it does not harm it if it is not found with the first percussion, so that he repeats over it with the phlebotomy several times.
However, perhaps an abscess may form in some people when bloodletting is not performed in the first percussion, but it does not harm them to have such an abscess somewhere.
On the benefit of bloodletting and the cautions to be observed therein. The quality of bloodletting, however, and its accidents arising from it, in whose correction you ought to think.
First, therefore, it is of which you ought to know, that bloodletting is not administered except in the preservation of health and its continuance, and caution from the arrival of illnesses.
And that bloodletting should be done in one of three veins which are in the elbow, namely, the Cephalic, and the Fusca, and the Basilica. And that bloodletting should be done at the beginning of Spring on a fast, in Spring and Summer; and Autumn and Winter after a meal, when the signs of repletion appear.
And let bloodletting be done on the first day, or on the third, after three hours have passed since the day began.
Bloodletting which is administered in illnesses does not have a determined hour; but when it provokes suitability and necessity for that, at night or day, and in every hour, and in every time.
And children should not be bled until they reach fourteen years of age. Nor should a pregnant woman be bled except from the fourth month up to the seventh. Nor should old men who have already passed sixty years be bled.
When, therefore, someone wishes to be bled for whatever reason: it is necessary that he cleanse his bowels before bloodletting with a gentle enema if there is much retained feces in them so that the veins do not draw away foul and harmful superfluities from the intestines to the principal members during bloodletting.
Nor should a patient be bled when he has surfeit, that is, sickening fullness; nor when drunk, nor recovering from drunkenness until that is removed from them. Nor a weak person with dropsy.
And let bloodletting be avoided again after a colic attack, and vomiting, and diarrhea, and multiplication of intercourse, and labor, and exertion, and wakefulness, and fasting, and everything that dissolves virtue from the bodily or animal thing.
Then consider in the subtlety of humors before that, if blood is thick with foods and drinks, and medicines: if possible to him do that.
Then let him enter a bath, if nothing prohibits him from it: or let him exercise with some exercise, so that the blood becomes thinner.
And place his bloodletting in the chest, around the third hour of the day, as we said: and try, that his chest be evacuated that day from all animal evils accidents: such as distress, and anger, and fear: and from all bodily accidents, such as labor, and pain, and excessive intercourse, and those like them.
And let the things customary for his dwelling be present with whose use men ran custom from fragrance, and scent, and rejoicing and those like them by as much quantity as possible.
Then let the phlebotomist sit on a cushion which is higher than the cushion of the person undergoing bloodletting; afterwards let him extract his arm and rub it with his hand twice or thrice. Then let him tie a ligature with a bandage, and wrap it twice.
And let the constriction be temperate, for when the constriction is unequal, or by excess in the constriction then it hinders the course of blood: or in slackness, then it also hinders the course of blood.
Then after the constriction it is necessary that the phlebotomist rubs his hands together at the same time until the veins swell and declare themselves to the sense.
Then let the phlebotomist cleanse the place to be lanced with a little oil, properly an old one.
Then he should place the index finger of his left hand upon the very vein under the place where he desires to perform the phlebotomy, slightly: so that the vein does not flee, and the percussion may be made. For since some veins are like a fleeing chord at phlebotomy and some are full of windiness; and when you place the phlebotome upon them, they contract under the phlebotome, and the phlebotomist is deceived, and the phlebotome does not open the vein; and if it opens it, it is strict: therefore on account of this, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be firm and diligent in all these matters.
Then he should lay down the phlebotome. If therefore the vein is opened from one place, then it is good. And if not, then repeat that at another place a little below or above it with haste: if the place is not apostatized.
But if it is apostatized or becomes weak and swollen, then dismiss him for a day or two and do not bind the ligature. For it might perhaps draw a hot abscess. Nor let him enter a bath.
Then let him repeat the phlebotomy if he desires.
But if the opening is small, or the blood runs subtly; and you fear that the quantity of blood will not go out which you wish: then repeat the phlebotome in the same hole according to straightness, and add a little in the operation.
And do that with haste before the place is apostatized; for an apostatized place is in many men at a small operation.
But if you see that it is already apostatized, then do not repeat upon it at all, for nothing excuses this to you. And put something from the dregs of oil upon it; because it relieves the course of blood. And it is better in this place than oil itself, and than other oils.
And similarly apply the feces of oil in all your phlebotomies, which phlebotomists do well at the stopping of the course of blood; and they do this with tyriaca, alfarach, and sagzenea, when one of them is placed upon the place.
For blood is thinned and resolved when it is thick.
And if it should happen that a large abscess occurs at the place of phlebotomy, for this often happens, especially to one who is not a phlebotomist except for that vein, or the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and put a sponge infused in water and salt, heated a little, upon the place; and bind it for an hour, for it will be dissolved.
And it is necessary that you do this after the blood has come out from the vein itself, with its complement, or from another vein.
And if something of blackness, or greenness should remain in the place after a few days, it does no harm; and if you wish, put something of aloe, or myrrh dissolved upon it: or something from the juice of mint, that is, calamint or something like it.
And indeed abscesses and prominences often occur at phlebotomy in the Basilica.
Therefore put your hand upon it; then if you find softness under your pressure upon it, then that prominence is bad. Therefore beware, that you put something of what we said upon it. For perhaps arterial blood will flow from it.
But make a plaster for it with that in which there is astringency, so that the place hardens. Then treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
And it is necessary that you draw from every man blood according to the quantity of his strength. And what appears from the color conquering over the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it go out until it reddens; and similarly if you see it thick, then let it go until it becomes thin; and similarly if it is sharp, until its sharpness is taken away.
And it is necessary for him who is full, strong, and needs bloodletting with one cup, that the phlebotomy of the vein be enlarged, and the phlebotomist be wide; and in him who is weak, let it be the opposite of that.
And it is necessary that he extract it in cups, and that the hole be narrow; and better in phlebotomy of the vein is what is administered, that there be a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is safe from the flow of blood, and from the cutting of a nerve; and it is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy by width and length.
And for whom syncope is accustomed to happen at bloodletting, it is necessary that he eat before phlebotomy a small loaf soaked in pomegranate juice water; or secaniabin if it is heated; and you should draw from him three or four cups of blood.
And if he is of a cold complexion, then he should take before phlebotomy bread soaked in syrup of mue, or in syrup of honey spiced with spices, or in fragrant aromatic syrup.
If syncope should happen at bloodletting and the cause of it is excess blood loss then it is necessary that he drink meat broth and a subtle fragrant syrup; and use aromatics with agarwood and line his chest with them; and use the other things which we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on syncope from evacuation.
He who wishes to spare his arm and to let out his blood a second time; it is necessary for him whose bloodletting is for great evacuation, and whose strength is weak, that he should let out blood gradually by the amount of his strength on continuous days.
He who wishes to experiment on his own arm and to let out his blood a second time, and whose body is strong, then he should do this after seven or nine hours from his first bloodletting.
But he who wishes to draw blood from his body to the opposite side to which it leans, ought to have it done to him on the second or third day.
But in him whose body has much blood already heated and sharpened, and it causes a fever to happen: it is necessary that the blood should go out from it at once, and a large quantity be drawn from it, and the opening be enlarged until fainting occurs: after you have observed all the conditions of bloodletting and so that you put your hand upon his pulse along the course of the blood, so that death does not happen in place of fainting. Very often this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligence occurs.
And it is not necessary when you wish to open the arm and let out blood a second time, since the opening of the vein has already closed and the blood's exit becomes difficult, to press upon it with violence and quickly straighten it. For that is very bad indeed, rather let it alone until a second bloodletting is performed.
Or remove with sharpness of the phlebotomist's tool that which has been clotted from the blood in the opening of the vein and put something dissolved salt upon it. And put something from Tyrian agaric or wormwood on it and apply a soft compress until the blood flows out.
But if the vein has already become inflamed, then leave it alone and do not press upon it until the inflammation subsides.
But if necessity compels to let out blood a second time and there is no excuse, then either the phlebotomist should perform it above that place or on another arm in another vein.
The vein-cutting place for the arm is on the side of the elbow, and on the wrist, if they are not found hidden, because it is composed of them.
And the quality of its vein-cutting is such that the sick person should insert his hand into warm water until the arm reddens and the vein appears manifestly.
Then it should be bound upon it with a ligament with a little medium constriction. Then the vein-cutting should be done transversely little by little, not laterally nor according to length, and let the opening be wide, and let your vein-cutting be such that you do it above the junction of the hand a little.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse the hand again in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your purpose.
But if you are in the summer days, then excuse yourself from immersing the hand in warm water again. And indeed the course of blood is put mostly into warm water in the time of winter.
And the vein-cutting of this vein is safer than all veins because there is no pulsating vein nor nerve under it.
But vein-cutting of the Saluatella vein on the right hand brings relief to illnesses of the liver.
And the quality of its vein-cutting is such that you should bind the inner part of the hand with a ligament, or your own hand, after you have immersed it in warm water until the vein swells and is shown distinctly to the senses. Then cut the vein transversely. And if you happen to cut it entirely, it will not harm her in any way.
And preserve, that you do not finish your hand with the vein-cutting. For under it are the nerves of the fingers exposed from flesh.
Then immerse the hand again into warm water and let the blood run into it. For if you do not repeatedly immerse it in warm water, the blood clots in the vein's opening and prevents its course.
Therefore, when you have extracted the necessary amount from the blood, then place oil and salt upon the vein so that it does not quickly solidify.
And similarly, it is necessary to do this with every narrow branch.
The performance of its phlebotomy from the left hand is: because it brings relief to spleen diseases: and similarly do this in its phlebotomy just as you did in the second equally.
But the benefit of phlebotomy from the saphenous vein is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as diseases of the womb, and retention of menses, and infirmities of the kidneys, and old ulcers of the hips and legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is that the sick person should place their foot in warm water and rub it until the veins protrude; and bind above the joint of the foot with a tourniquet. And indeed the location of the veins is near the heel, apparent towards the thumb; and there branch out from it many branches on the surface of the foot.
Therefore, phlebotomize it in a larger branch of it, or at the heel in its cluster; because this is better and safer.
But if you phlebotomize it on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves which are beneath it on the surface of the foot.
And place your incision for phlebotomy across it, as if you wished to cut it; and let the phlebotomist be Nesil.
But if the flow of blood is impeded, then immerse their foot again in warm water and let the blood run into it until it is evacuated.
But if the phlebotomist misses the vein at first, then repeat the phlebotomy a little higher up, for this location is safe and you need not fear any harm from it when you are careful of the nerves, as we have said.
And likewise with the saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
The location of the sciatic veins, as we said, is at the heel from the outer side.
And the benefit of its phlebotomy is for pain in the buttock when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is for the weak one to enter a bath and hurry; and to bind his leg from the side of the buttock up above the heel with four fingers using a thin, long strip: for it does not appear except because of that.
Therefore when it appears, then make a phlebotomy on it according to whatever skill is possible for you, or according to transversal cutting; and it is better either that you strike it with an incision or divide it by sectioning. For its location is safer, and it itself is very hidden in most people.
For its location is safer, and it itself is very hidden in most people. And if you do not find it and it does not appear to the senses at all, then make a phlebotomy on one of its branches, and that is the one which appears on the back of the foot and towards the auricle; and be careful of the nerves, and let a quantity of blood run out as much as you wish.
Then loosen the constriction and put skin over the place of the phlebotomy and bind the place. For it heals quickly.
On Cupping and the Quality of its Use
Cups are made from horns, and from metal, and from glass.
And cupping indeed is done according to two methods. With scarification and the extraction of blood: and the other is cupping without scarification.
And this cupping which is without scarification is according to two methods. For either it is with fire. Or it is without fire.
And there are fourteen places in the body where cupping is administered with scarification and bloodletting. Of these, one is Ventosatio Alnocrati, and it is the back of the head; and Alkehel, and it is the middle of the neck; and the cuppings of Alhagdahim, and they are two plates of the neck from both sides together; and the cupping of the mind, and it is under the jaw in the lower part of the mouth; and the cupping of two spatulas; and the cupping of Alachosos on top of the end of the tailbone; and the cupping of two focilium, and they are the middle of the two arms; and the cupping of two legs; and the cupping of two calves.
And cupping indeed does not extract blood from you through the fine veins scattered in the flesh, and therefore its virtue does not fall away from them, as is the case with it from phlebotomy. Nor should cupping be administered either with fire or without fire in any diseases that arise from repletion until the whole body is evacuated.
And if necessity compels cupping from illness or for custom, we administer it at any hour in the beginning of the month, at its end, and in the middle of it, and at any time it may be.
For it is because some people when blood multiplies within them until they need its extraction through cupping, find heaviness and a headache in their head.
And there are some of them who find repletion and redness in their face, head, and neck. And there are some of them who find itching on their face and forehead, darkness, and dullness in their eyes.
And there are some of them who scratch the place of their cupping. And there are some of them whose laughter increases. And there are some who find the taste of blood in their mouth, or their tongue swells and sheds blood. And among them is one whose sleep is multiplied. And among them is he who sees in his dream blood and redness, and those who are dead, and wounds, and things which are similar to these.
Therefore when we see something of these things, and especially if it is in the third part of the month, we order then that venesection be done, after two hours or three have passed from the day.
The advantage of venesection of the neck is that it brings gravity to the head, and what is poured out goes to the eyes. But truly it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of the whole body.
And this indeed is a venesection in place of cephalic phlebotomy.
And it is not permitted that one with a cold complexion, or who has catarrh, use it. For it brings him great harm.
And because of this, it is not necessary that old men use it, and those in whose head are cold illnesses.
But whoever habitually does this upon himself, forgetfulness arises in him.
And because of this, it is necessary that you order the phlebotomist to lower his hand a little with the venesection towards the lower parts, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Venesection or cupping is in place of brown phlebotomy and basilica phlebotomy, and because of this it brings relief to asthma, and constriction of shortness of breath, and fissure of the instrument of breathing, and cough, and repletion.
And it is necessary that the cupping be applied for a short time, because if it is placed lower, it generates weakness in the heart and stomach.
Venesection on the temples brings relief to pains happening in the head, and ophthalmia, and hemicrania, and perforation, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and it is in place of basilica phlebotomy.
And it is necessary that you instruct the one who draws blood not to press with his hand during scarification so that he does not strike an artery and cause bleeding.
Bloodletting under the chin gathers humors in the mouth and for the inflammation of the gums and similar illnesses which are in the mouth; and it stands in place of phlebotomy in other parts which are on the two lips.
Bloodletting with spoons gathers for the phlegmatic humor which comes from reflux and heat.
Bloodletting with two cupping glasses gathers the benefit of phlebotomy from the veins the Basilica, the Fusca and the Cephalic; because it draws blood from all those small veins which are in the flesh and they draw from other larger veins until the drawing reaches those three veins.
And it is necessary that you instruct the one who draws blood not to proceed much in scarification because the place is stripped of flesh and under it are nerves and arteries.
A cup which is cupped on a swollen part gathers for hemorrhoids of the anus and lower ulcers.
And it is necessary that you instruct the one who draws blood that the cup be large and that it be of metal because the place needs strong suction and perhaps slender cups will break and it should be scarified with a large scarification.
Cupping glasses on the legs diminishes noticeably; because they draw blood from the whole body and they gather for old pains in the kidneys, the womb and the bladder; they provoke menses, and they gather phlegm and mucus; and they stand in place of phlebotomy of two saphenous veins and the femoral vein.
However they weaken the body greatly and cause fainting in many people.
And the benefit of cupping on the femoral vein is close to the benefit of cupping on two legs.
The quality of the position of the cupping glasses is to place them first empty and suck with temperate suction; and do not prolong the application of the cupping glasses but put them quickly and remove them quickly so that the humors may come to the place by equal advent; and do not cease to repeat and continue this until you see the place already reddening and swelling, and the redness of blood appears; then scarify and repeat the suction gradually. Then consider in the arrangement of bodies.
For he who is of men of tender flesh, rare pores, it is necessary that you scarify him once, no more: so that the place is not ulcerated.
And instruct the one who applies cupping glasses to enlarge the scarification and deepen it a little; and to temper the suction in ease, speed, and gentle motion.
But if there is thickness in the blood, then it is necessary that you scarify him twice. For in the first indeed a way is opened for the refinement of the blood and its aqueousness; and in the second indeed a thorough examination for the exquisite extraction of thick blood.
But if the blood is very feculent, then let there be a third scarification to follow the ultimate.
And lastly, when we wish to extract blood gradually, or a little, one scarification suffices us. But if we wish for much bloodletting, let us scarify with many scarifications.
And if we have measured that the blood is thick: then it is necessary that it be scarified with a deep scarification; and the equal end in scarification is the depth of the skin.
What is it that ought to be administered from oils at the application of cupping glasses and what should the one applying cupping glasses beware of?
Now in him indeed whose skin is thick, hard, dark, and whose pores are tight, it is necessary that the places for cupping be anointed with opening, softening, resolving oils: if it is in summer time, such as oil of alkana or oil of violets, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of pumpkin seeds.
And if it is in the time of winter, then narcissus oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or syrup: and those like them.
But if the excess is thick, cold: then let the oil be bitter almond, or balm of Gilead oil, or white oil, or anise oil: and those like them.
But if the pores are to be opened on delicate flesh, then it is necessary that it be forbidden from oil, and it is necessary for them to wash the places of the openings after opening with rose water, or with cold water, or with solar water, or with cucumber water, or with purslane water: and those like them.
But he whose blood is of much humidity, let him wash the openings with vinegar, or with myrtle water, and sumac: and those like them.
But he whose excesses are thick, let him wash his openings with old wine, or with water of samshoot, or a decoction of anise, or chamomile: and those like them.
And it is necessary that cupping be done in a bath, or in the vestige of a bath, indeed it is necessary that it be administered after exiting from the bath for an hour, or for two hours.
And it is not necessary for anyone to sleep after cupping.
What is it by which cupping, or phlebotomy should be regulated before cupping?
And after it is necessary for you to consider first: then if the cupping or phlebotomy is choleric, and acuity and inflammation overcome his blood: then it is necessary that he take refrigerants, such as pomegranate rinds: and also endive with vinegar and lettuce, and chicory, and jujubes: and those like them.
And make his foods chicken, and eggs, and foods seasoned with sourness: and those like them.
And for him whose constitution is cold, it is necessary that he take in drink syrup of honey, or of almond, or of asafetida made from seeds; and let him take spiced wine which is medium, that is between old and new; and let it be instructed that he use scarcity of food. And let his food be chickens, and sparrows; and finches, that is, small birds; and squabs of pigeons he should eat.
And it is necessary that drink on the day of cupping and bloodletting be more than food; and it is necessary that there be given in drink to some men in the hours tyriaca alfaroch, or a medicine from musk, that is, musk, or alesselithe before cupping; and before bloodletting, or after: so that the principal limbs may be strengthened, and the blood thinned. And it is not necessary that they take it in heated drink.
Concerning Cupping Without Scarification. But cuppings which are without scarification are those which are placed upon the liver, and spleen, and gouty foot, and upon the belly, navel, and places of the kidneys, and the narrow part of the thigh; because these members do not suffer scarification upon themselves.
And there is not sought through them except either attraction of blood from a member to a member; just as we place the cupping glass upon the nipples in the sickness of a nosebleed. And we use them so that we may loosen from a member invisible coldness and wind in a member; just as we place the cupping glass upon the belly and navel. For it itself rarefies the member, and warms it, and removes the pain therefore because it dissolves that windiness.
It is also placed upon the kidneys when obstruction or a stone occurs in them. For by its power of attraction it perhaps opens the obstruction, or extracts the stone from its place.
And he does the same when it is placed upon the liver, and the spleen in windy weather to ward off wind in both.
And these cupping glasses are administered empty with incision only. And sometimes they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered full of warm water in pleural diseases; and that is, that the cupping glass be filled and large, with warm water alone, or water in which herbs suitable for the purpose have been boiled.
The form of a cupping glass administered with fire.
Let the width of its opening be two open fingers, according to what we have described; and let its depth be half a palm; and let there be a small hole on its side in a place which is approximately its middle, according to the size that a needle can enter; make it from brass or copper, with thick edges, smooth, equal, polished; so that it does not injure the limb upon which it is placed. And let there be a transverse rod of metal, or iron, in its middle, where a candle with fire is placed.
And now this cupping glass is made large, greater than that which we have described, and a little smaller than that, according to the diseases and age of him who uses it.
For cupping glasses for children and weaklings are different than cupping glasses for men and those with large bodies.
The manner of placing this cupping glass with fire upon a limb is to light a wick with fire from linen properly, or a small candle from wax; and place it upon the middle of the transverse rod which is in the middle of the cupping glass; so that the ignited fire be approximately beneath the lower part of the cupping glass, so that the body of the sick person is not burned.
Then place it upon the limb; and let a finger be upon the hole which I mentioned, until whenever we hold the cupping glass: when we need to, let us remove the finger, and let vapor escape through that hole, and the cupping glass will immediately be released.
Then apply fire to the ligature according to its manner, and repeat it if it is insufficient.
But the cupping glass which is applied in pleurisy with water has neither a transverse stick nor a hole, and it is not applied unless it is filled with water and placed only upon the limb.
And this is its form.
And the larger this cupping glass is, so that it can hold a great amount of water, the better it is.
On the suspension of bloodletting instruments.
Bloodletting instruments are not administered in many places except those where the positioning of cupping glasses is not possible due to their small size, such as the lip, and gum, and those similar to them. Or on a limb denuded of flesh, such as a finger, and nose, and those similar to them.
And the quality of using them is: that you should take it from bloodletting instruments which are in fresh waters, clean from putrefactions.
Then let them be dismissed day and night in fresh water until they are hungry, and nothing remains in their bellies. Then the body should first be evacuated with bloodletting and cupping. Then wash the limb of the sick person until it reddens. Then place them upon it.
Therefore when they are filled and fall, and suction of the place is possible with a cupping glass, then it is best for healing; and if not, then wash the place with vinegar. Then with much water, rub and squeeze it.
If the flow of blood continues after the fall of the bloodletting instruments, and it is oozing; then infuse a linen cloth in cold water and place it on top until the oozing stops.
If the blood multiplies, then sprinkle powdered saffron or galls and those similar to them from astringents upon it until the blood stops.
Or peeled beans are placed on the spot and left until they adhere to the place for the blood is cut off.
And if repetition of the cupping is necessary, when it is possible, change them.
But if leeches are forbidden from suspension, then wash the place with fresh blood. Or stick a needle into the places until something comes out of the blood. Then place them, for they themselves when they feel something from the blood, adhere immediately.
When therefore you wish them to fall off, sprinkle over them something from ground aloe, or salt, or ashes, and they will fall off immediately.
This Chapter is also very often necessary in the Art of Medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations of accidents in bones.
Know you sons, that foolish doctors and the common people boast about this Chapter who have never looked at an ancient book nor read a letter from it.
And because of this reason, this method is private from the sciences in our land. And I never encountered anything entirely good in it and I have not attained from it what I attained except for the length of reading ancient books and study upon understanding them until I extracted knowledge of it from them.
Then I adhered to experiment and study throughout the length of my life.
And now I have described to you from it in this Chapter all that contains my knowledge and on which my experiment passed after I shortened it for you and freed it from the occupation of elongation and shortened it without shortening and showed it without declination: and I formed in it many forms from the forms of instruments which are administered in it, with addition by declination, as I did in the two preceding chapters.
Chapter II.
It is fitting that we say in the prologue of this chapter, summaries and chapters, to whose understanding the craftsman is compelled at first to attain: namely so that you and those who are ready may know or learn this noble art and teach it to others.
Therefore I say that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or fall happens to someone, then it is necessary for you to hurry first to phlebotomize him and loosen him, or both together: if nothing forbids it such as weakness of strength, or he who suffers from one of these things is a child or decrepit old man, or the time is one of intense heat or intense cold.
Then let him be content with his food, cold vegetables and poultry and kid meats; and forbid wine, fatty meats, and all foods that fill the veins with blood. Until when you are safe from hot abscesses and do not fear the effusion of matter to the limb; then let the invalid return to his first usual diet with which he was accustomed to run.
Therefore when a broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary for the invalid to eat nourishing foods of much nourishment, coarse and heavy, in which there is viscosity: such as foods made from boiled wheat with water, rice, heads and feet and bellies of cows, eggs, and fresh fish; and thick wine, and things like them. For by this regimen coagulation of the fracture is done faster and better.
And know that broken bones when they are in veins which are in the first old age and decrepit, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their nature always, because of the desiccation of their limbs; and those are consolidated and continued which are from them at the end of tenderness, such as the bones of small children.
Nevertheless, nature attaches to a fractured bone from every side something like glue, in which there is thickness, so that it adheres and binds itself until they are joined together and are united until it comes to an end of strength and firmness, as it was at first, until nothing prevents it from its own operations; and for this reason it is necessary that you place nourishment for the weak foods, in which there are heaviness, and viscosity, and thickness, as we have said.
And know that fractures are of different kinds, according to the diversity of members; for a fracture of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the breastbone is different from a fracture of the spine bone; and similarly all the other members are different from each other. And the kinds of bone fractures are also diversified within themselves.
For a fracture of it is arched, besides which stars occur in it. And sometimes a fracture of it occurs along the length of the bone; and there are fractures of it that are sagittal, that is, stars, and additions proceeding, as are in a reed pen, when a knife is fitted for writing. And not proceeding; and there is a fracture with a wound and disruption in the head; and there is a small fissure fracture.
And every kind has its own ingenuity or instrument for its restoration, according to what will come to remembrance of it, distinguished in its places.
And from what a bone fracture is known is its crookedness and prominence; and the appearance of it to the sense, and the sound of it when you press it with your hand.
Therefore, when there is no apparent crookedness in the place, nor a sound at your touch when you touch the bone with agitation, nor does the weak one find great pain; then there is no fracture there, rather it is possible that there is crookedness, or a small fissure: therefore, it is not necessary that you move it with your hand and compression altogether, rather place upon it from medicines, of which remembrance comes, after that moment which suits the place; then let it be bound with a fine bandage.
And know that when a place arches and is split into two, except for what may happen to it in terms of satagiae, nevertheless every part is removed from its companion: then it is necessary for you to begin at your hour towards its rectification by evening it out before a hot apostema occurs to it.
But if a hot apostema should occur to it, then let it alone for several days until the apostema becomes quiet. Then even it out according to any way possible from gentleness and ingenuity.
And know that its restoration and evening out is easier than bone, in which satagiae occur.
Then bind it up according to what will come to your recollection of it.
But if there are satagiae in bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from its two parts, if it is a hand or foot; or with your hand, if the limb is small; or with two ropes, or with a rope and hand.
And let your position be such that you place the limb upon an equal place, according to its natural shape, until when the parts of the broken limb are extended: then try to make those additions return with all your ingenuity and according to any way you can in their places; and be careful according to your strength, lest pain or injury should occur upon the weak one through your operation: and try, according to your strength, to apply one of the two bones with its companion according to the better forms.
And it is necessary at that hour for you to try and touch it with your hand. If therefore you see anything different there, correct it and even it out according to the amount of your strength.
And be careful of vehement extension and strong compression, as many stupid people do. Very often they cause a hot apostema or contraction in the limb to occur through their operation: just as we have already seen that very often from their operations.
Then apply after equalization and a decent operation and constriction of that member and rest and quietness: and warn the sick person about it. And make him beware, lest he move it in the hour of his watchings and his sleep at its turning and its agitation and at its excretion and all its motions with its last strength. And that he beware lest its position be a position with which pain follows. Which is because when he feels pain or injury in the arrangement of the position of the member then it is necessary that he change it to another arrangement from which he does not feel pain.
And beware with him that its position be equal and straight so that crookedness may not happen in the member when it is restored.
And the quality of the constriction of the fractured member is according to what I have said.
Know that fractured members are diversified in their smallness and their largeness and their shape.
Which therefore of them are small such as the arm and the finger and the knee joint and similar to these then it is necessary that there be a wrapping of soft, subtle cloth. But which of them are large such as the hip and the leg then it is necessary that there be a broad, hard wrapping upon them.
Because a broad bandage connects a large member and tightens it from every part with equal constriction so that a blemish does not enter it.
Then begin after your evacuation from equalization to put a suitable plaster upon it on soft lint over the place of its fracture. Then begin to wrap the bandage upon the place of its fracture with three or four wrappings according to what the member deserves and constrict your hand a little with the bandage.
Then go with it to a part above the place of the fracture and constrict less than was your constriction with which you constricted the fractured place. Then lengthen it with inversion from the place of fracture a little, and soften the constriction gradually, until you take a large thing from a healthy place.
Then take another strip, and again wrap it over the fractured place with inversions. Afterwards go with inversion to the lower part from the fracture. And let your operation be in the constriction of inversion, and its softening, according to what we said in the first upper inversion.
Then put between the inversions from soft tow, or cloth, with which the crookedness of the fracture may be equalized, if there is crookedness in it; and if not, do not put anything in it.
Then wrap another strip over it itself. Afterwards equal over these inversions stars well-made immediately, if there is not inflation in the place, nor hot abscess.
But if there is inflation or abscess in it: then put over it that which sits upon the abscess and removes the swelling; and let it be so for several days. Then bind stars over it at that time.
And let the stars be from halves of broad cane, planed, wisely shaped; or let them be from wood from which sieves are made, which are made from pine, or palm, that is, branches of palm, or calamus; and let the width of every star be according to this form, and this same figure.
However it is necessary that the star which is put over the very ligature be somewhat thicker and broader than the other stars; and the length of the star shall be according to what is permitted by the limb in size and smallness.
Then bind over the stars with another strip, according to the same first binding. Then bind over it with threads well-made, according to what we said concerning the binding; and it is that your binding be over the fractured place more; and the further it is lengthened from the fracture, let the binding be less.
And it is necessary that they are threads medium in thickness and fineness, and are from soft flax.
For if the threads are thick, as I have seen from the practice of foolish people putting their threads from twisted flax cords, it is a great error: because constriction falls with them beyond quality.
And slender threads again are unsuitable: because you do not achieve through constriction with them what you wish.
And it is not necessary that there be less than a finger between star and star.
If the weak person is injured through the extremities of the stars after constriction in healthy places: then put under them from soft tow, or carded wool, until nothing is injured from it.
When however there is a fracture with a wound, and disruption occurs in the skin, I will come with remembrance of it in the second chapter singularity.
And know that not every fractured limb ought to be constricted with stars from the first day. For which is because when the limb is large, it is not necessary that you place stars upon it except after five days, or seven, or more, according to your safety from the event of hot abscess.
And this is the method of plasters, with which the ancients restored, which are placed upon fracture and dislocation.
Method of a common shortened plaster, restoring fracture, suitable for many complexions, especially women, and boys: because it is from it on account of which neither heat nor cold overcomes.
And it is, that you take from the powder of a mill, and it is the marrow of flour which hangs in the walls of the mill at the motion of the millstone: and you make it just as it is, except that you sift it with bran: and put its confection neither thick nor thin. Then use it.
Method of another Plaster, restoring fracture, and dislocation, and torsion. Take almonds, laudanum, acacia, enula, and mugwort; and juice of all, each ten drachms, myrrh and aloes each five drachms and alethil twenty drachms, let all be ground and sifted, and mix with alethil water. Or with egg white if the complexion of the patient is heated. Then use this plaster. For it is of good composition, it restores broken bones quickly, and it benefits many people.
A different method for a plaster, which also benefits fractures and dislocations. Take mugwort, mess, and white alteae, all ten drachms each, myrrh and aloes both five drachms each, acacia six drachms, armenian bole twenty drachms, grind all together thoroughly, sift them, and make them into a plaster with water or egg white.  And apply it.
A method for a plaster for joints and separated bones from their places; and it eases pain that occurs to them, and bone division, and fracture. Take boiled wool and submerge it in vinegar and boiled oil, and place it on the area.
And in this plaster there is no power of restoration, but it is good for easing a hot abscess and expels pain properly.
A method for a plaster which restores a broken bone. Take leaves of the deaf fig and leaves of wild poppy; grind all together and make a plaster from both.
A shortened method for a plaster administered for the restoration of a bone fracture; and when you want the resolution of remaining abscesses. Take root of altaea, chamomile, violet flowers, and herb flour, all equal parts; grind all together and make them into a plaster with wine if the limb is not heated.
But if it is heated then make it with humid coriander water or with water and use it.
A stronger method for a plaster to resolve this [first] one is when a hard abscess occurs during the restoration of a limb. Take equal parts of the root of althea, flaxseed, balaustium, melilot, samsuck, violets flowers, and chamomile. Grind all together, and make them into a paste with willow water, or sweet water, or wine. All of this according to the heat of the limb and the rest of its warmth.
However, Hippocrates did not say in his book that anything should be placed on a fractured limb during its restoration except a plaster made from wax and oil; nothing else; and he narrated that it should be a medium between thickness and thinness.
But Galen thought that things should be placed on a fractured limb during its restoration which have a drying effect of heat, such as myrrh, aloes and frankincense, and similar ones from those we have mentioned.
Method of a plaster that brings together injury and pain. Take equal parts of mugwort, chickpea flour, human hair clippings or bird feathers, althea and salt; grind and sift them, and make a plaster from it.
The quantity of this plaster, by which the bandage should remain, then be loosened, is such that you consider whether it does not happen to the weak pain, nor itching, nor the fractured bone moves from its place; then do not loosen it for many days. But if intense itching occurs to him in that place, or disturbing pain, or swelling; then hurry and loosen it in an hour, and remove the plaster from him; and take a soft cloth, or a soft, moist marine sponge. Submerge it in warm water and wash the place with it until the itching subsides and the pain settles.
But if intense itching occurs to him in that place, or disturbing pain, or swelling; then hurry and loosen it in an hour, and remove the plaster from him; and take a soft cloth, or a soft, moist marine sponge. Submerge it in warm water and wash the place with it until the itching subsides and the pain settles. Then let the limb rest for an hour. Then place upon it wool cut up, dipped in vinegar and oil, or rose oil; and bind it on for one night, until you are safe from hot abscesses, and the swelling of the limb subsides, and its pain is removed.
Then repeat it to a subtle stricture, and a small plaster; and do not constrict it with your first constriction, and subtle with it, until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess, and redness, and pain, and swelling, and all accidents are now removed altogether, and it no longer needs a plaster and constriction, then repeat it as you did at first equally.
And if nothing of those things which we have said should happen to the limb, then do not untie it except after three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when that whole thing is dismissed for twenty days, according to what appears to you from the loosening of the limb, as we said, until when the fracture adheres, and the coagulation of flesh approximates upon it: add also then in constriction more than your entire first constriction; and add also in thickness of food for the weak, according to its previous remembrance.
But if you see the place of the fracture already drying out, and wasting more than it should: then know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching it. Therefore embrocate it with warm water at every time that you untie it, and let it be so in all three days, and relieve the constriction a little.
Through this operation therefore nourishment runs to the limb, and heals quickly.
But that which foolish restorers do from a fracture of a limb with another vice, when it is not restored at first according to what is necessary, and is restored according to tortuosity: this is an error from their operation, and great fear; and if it were right, the ancients would have said it in their books, and they would have operated with it.
And I have not seen any trace of them there at all, and it is better that it not be done.
On the making of an accidental wound on the head.
The kinds of fracture are diverse, and its shapes are many; and its causes are distinct.
For there is a fracture which occurs from a blow with a sword; and the blow removes the entire mouth until it reaches the syaphne, which is under the bone, just as an axe does to wood; and on account of this, this kind of fracture is called Axial.
Or a sword strikes a certain bone, and strikes its face, and the incision does not penetrate to its very end; and this kind of fracture is called Kalaan, that is, Elevation absolute.
And a wound may be of two fractures, either large or small.
And there is a fracture which is comminution, or attrition; and its cause is a blow with a stone, or a fall onto a stone, or things similar to these.
And this fracture is also either penetrating, which already approaches the panniculus, which is under the bone; or it is in the face of the bone; and the wound of these two fractures is also either small or large.
And there is a fracture which is hidden in the bone to the subtlety of a hair; and it is a small fissure, and on account of this, this kind of fracture is called Capillary.
And from them is a fracture which occurs from a fall or a blow with a stone, and things similar to these, which cause a sheet of bone to enter inwards; and a cavity is formed in its place; just as it happens to bellows of air, when they are struck by a blow, and a part of them enters inwards.
And this very often occurs in the heads of moist bones, such as are the heads of children.
And all these kinds of fractures are separated dislocations, and I will come with a recollection of the whole in its place.
And we recognize all these kinds of fractures by examination upon them, and inquiry into them with probes, and removal of corrupted flesh which are upon them.
The capillary kind, however, is recognized by this, that it is detected upon the bone, and it is removed and smoothed upon it with a cautery; for the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of a fracture, consider first the accidents of the patient; then if you see from the accidents that it signifies with manifest meaning upon fear, such as vomiting cholera, extension, and loss of intellect, and abscission of voice, and syncope, and acute fever, and egress of eyes, and redness of them, and similar things to these accidents in many constitutions, without a doubt it does not heal; and if you see the accidents are not terrifying to you, and you hope for salvation; then begin its treatment.
Which is, if a wounded person comes to you first when wounded; and it is that in the winter days, then it is necessary for you to study in the removal of bone before the fourteenth day according to every disposition.
And if it is in the summer days, then it is necessary for you to hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, before what is under the bone from the fatty tissue is corrupted, and those accidents occur which we have recounted.
Which if the fracture of the bone has already reached the fatty tissue touching the brain, and it is with small pieces, and attraction; then it is necessary for you to cut into the comminuted and crushed part according to what I narrate to you.
And it is for you to shave the head of the wounded person; and expose it upon the bone according to whatever way is possible for you; and according to the shape of the wound and what is light upon the sick person.
If you encounter a flow of blood or a hot abscess at the exposure of bone, then oppose it with what is necessary. And it is, that you fill the place with cloths dipped in wine and rose oil; and make the wound rest, until the abscess subsides, and you are secure from the flow of blood. Then begin in the care of the bone, and its removal.
And this is done according to one of two methods.
One method is to cut the bone with a sharp-edged Incisor; and this is its form.
Then apply another Incisor after the Incisor, slightly wider than it; and this is its form.
Then apply yet another Incisor, even wider than the second.
And the second method is that you have a number of diverse Incisors; some of which are wider than others, and some of them shorter than others; and that they be in ultimate sharpness at their extremities, and be made from tempered iron or steel; and use facility in percussion upon the Incisor, so that it does not strike the head, and injure it.
But if the bone is strong and hard, then it is necessary that you pierce around its circumference, before you apply the Incisors, with Awls which are called non-penetrating Awls; and they are not so named unless because they do not pass through the end of the bone into the flesh beyond it; therefore, because the Awl has a rounded extremity above that which is below its pointed head, similar to a rim, and a small circle prevents submerging and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it behooves you to take a great number of these Awls, each of which suits the quantity of thickness of the bone, until there is present to you an Awl for every skull; whose pointed extremity in length and shortness is according to the quantity of thickness of that skull.
And this is the form of three kinds of augers, or trepans.
The quality of perforating in a circle around the broken bone is: to place the auger upon the bone and revolve it with your fingers until you know the bone has been penetrated. Then transfer the auger to another place and put between each hole a quantity of thickness equal to the radius, or thereabouts.
Then cut with the incisors what is between each hole from the bone and make it thinner than you can on top of it from the point of lightness, as we said, until you remove the bone either with your hand or with some other instrument that you have prepared for it such as forceps and fine pincers.
And it is necessary that you take all care that the auger or incisor does not touch anything of the spinal cord.
Therefore, when you have gone around the bone perforating and it has been separated from the spinal cord, if it was continuous with it, and you have removed it, it is necessary that you scrape and equalize its extremity which remains in the bone with another similar instrument like an incisor. However, it is necessary that it be thinner and more subtle than other incisors.
And if anything remains of small bones and splinters, then take them with ease with what you have from your instruments. Then take care of the wound after that with linens and ointments as we said.
And another method of operation is easy and far removed from fear which Galen spoke of and praised with great praise and this is his speech. It is necessary for you first to begin to expose the part of bone from the place where the fracture is more violent and manifest until when you have exposed that part, and placed under it the extremity of this lenticular incisor, which has this form.
And the lentil-shaped part, being smooth, does not strike anything; and its sharp part on both sides thereof extending in length, as you see: so that the lentil-shaped part is attached to the bone, its face striking acutely upon the bone.
Then strike upon the Incisorium on one side with a small mallet until you have cut through the whole bone easily, as it turns; and you should be safe from the pouch, so that no accident may happen therein which you fear at all.
And if the physician were not more foolish than men, and more ignorant thereof, nor were he sleeping, then if anything remained attached to the bone from the pouch in some places, he would cut it off therefrom with the extremity of the lentil-shaped part of the instrument itself, and free it therefrom easily. For it is freed therefrom without harm and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate as far as the pouch, and that which is cut off from the bone is its surface, and roughness and subtle burrs remain therein: then it is necessary that you should plane away that roughness, and eradicate those burrs with fine rasps out of which you have prepared a number of diverse sizes, so that it may be possible for you to administer from them in every place the more suitable ones thereof, and straighter ones of them, according to that to which your operation leads you, and the fractured bone itself, and its shape. And it is necessary that you should administer in your reasoning, by which you first plane the bone, the wider ones of those rasps. Then use after that a finer one.
And it is necessary that you should administer in your reasoning, by which you first plane the bone, the wider ones of those rasps. Then use after that a finer one. And do not cease doing that continuously until you arrive at administering the thinnest and most delicate of them all.
But in every one of the remaining small fissures, capillary ones, and subtle fractures, it is necessary that you should administer care according to that which leads to its rectification.
And it is a thing which is not hidden from anyone who has any study in this art, and it stood upon what we have written and shown in large fractures.
But if the exposed subcutaneous tissue is retained when you remove the bone, then it is necessary that you take linen cloth, according to the amount of the wound, and immerse it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound. Then take another cloth, doubled or tripled, and immerse it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth; and do this as easily as you can over that, so that it does not press upon the bone.
Then apply a broad bandage over it; and do not tighten it except by the amount that holds the wound only; and leave it with this care for one day or two days until you are secure from hot abscess. Then untie it and administer afterward medicines with which there is superfluous dryness: such as lily roots, and herb flour, and frankincense powder, and aristolochia, and those like them; and it is that you make a powder from these medicines, which is sprinkled over the wound as they are dry.
And generally administer to it all medicine of a property which is to cleanse and not bite. And beware according to your ability that the wound in your care is clear; and there is neither dirt of ointment nor filthiness in it.
And beware according to your ability that the wound in your care is clear; and there is neither dirt of ointment nor filthiness in it. Nor allow pus to gather in it at all; for when pus gathers over the cerebral tissue, it corrupts it and putrefies it, and there occurs a great evil upon the sick afterward; and this already happens in the skull when bone is removed from it, especially when its care is neglected, blackness appears on its surface.
Therefore consider then if accidents happen to the sick which we have said, know that they are undoubtedly pernicious.
And if blackness does not occur except from the medicine which is placed upon it, and it is in the power of that medicine to make it black: then it is necessary that you take one part from honey, three parts from rose oil, and lines with them a cloth. Then place it upon the wound; afterwards care for it with the kinds of treatments which are suitable until it is healed.
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken except for its two upper parts together, or one of them; because it consists of two bones: since the lower part of it is cartilaginous, it is not broken, and nothing happens to it except attrition, twisting, and bruising.
If one of its two parts is broken, then it is necessary that you insert a small finger into the nostril and equalize that fracture with your index finger and thumb from outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape; and let this be done with skill and ease. And take care that during your operation there does not occur excessive pain upon the weak part.
But if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and your finger does not reach it: then it is necessary that you equalize it with the end of a radius, in which there is a small thickness.
But if the fracture is in both parts, then do as described above; and hasten with its restoration on the first day of the fracture, if it is possible. And if not, then after the seventh or tenth day near rest and a warm compress.
Then insert into the extremity of the nose a linen wick if the fracture is in one part; or insert two wicks if the fracture is in both parts: and let the thickness of the wick be such a quantity that it fills the nostril.
And some of the ancient restorers said to infuse the wicks in butter and change them every day. It does not seem to me, rather it is necessary, that licorice be poured into the albuginea, having been made with flour of mill. Then let the licorice be left until the mouth is strengthened and the cartilage hardens.
And sometimes a goose feather is introduced into the Nose in place of licorice, after it is covered with a soft cloth; and it happens that it holds the fracture of the Nose more strongly, and so that the weak one is not prevented from inhaling.
And this thing is not necessary. If you wish, do that; and if you wish, do licorice.
But if it should happen that the Nose breaks again while you are working, apply a plaster to the nose with carrot, or with quince infused in rose oil, or a little from dyakelon.
But if a hot abscess does not occur, then it is necessary that plasters be made with sesame flour and frankincense powder mixed with albuginea. Then put a soft stopper over it, and do not bind the Nose at all with anything.
But if the bones of the Nose are broken with a small fracture, or are crushed, then it is necessary that you split them open and remove them with instruments that suit them. Then suture the incision and treat it with what heals and consolidates with suitable plasters or ointments.
But if a wound should happen between the Nose, then it is necessary that you treat it with licorice; and administer a tube of lead until it heals.
Concerning the restoration of the lower jawbone, when it is broken.
When the lower jawbone is broken and its fracture is not with a wound: then look to see if its fracture is only outward, and it is not broken into two, and curves inward; then the recognition of it is easy.
Therefore it is necessary, if the fracture of it is on the right side, that you insert the index finger of your left hand into the mouth of the infirm person: similarly if the fracture is in the left jawbone, then insert the index finger of your right hand; and press with it the gibbosity of the fracture inwards with ease to the exterior with your other hand from the inner part of the bone, and equalize it with it.
But if the fracture of the jawbone has already been separated into two, then it is necessary that you apply extension from both parts, according to straightness: until its equalization is possible.
But if it happens that there is concussion or disruption in the teeth: then bind those of which you hope that they will remain with gold, silver, or silk thread. Then place a cerecloth over the fractured jawbone. Then place a doubled cloth over it, and put a large, well-made star over the cloth: or a piece of tanned sole leather equal in length to the jawbone.
Then tie it on top, according to how its bandage is prepared for you, and it suits its application until it is not destroyed: and instruct the infirm person that he keep quiet and still: and have his food be gentle sips.
But if you judge that something is already altered in some way: then hurry and loosen it on the third day. Then correct what has been altered from it, and plaster it with powder of millstone grit, with lime or with sesame flour, after you have removed the cerecloth: and put soft wool over the plaster.
While that plaster remains attached to it, and the bone arrangement is not altered, leave it alone, do not loosen it until it heals: or bind the fracture. Very often this fracture is bound for three weeks.
But if a hot abscess should happen in the meantime, then administer what we have often said in its calming, until that abscess is removed.
And if there is a fracture with a wound, consider it. For since a fragment is now separated from the bone, or by a saw; then carefully attend to this, so that you remove those fragments of the saw with what suits you in their removal from instruments.
But if the opening of the wound is narrow, then enlarge it with a phlebotomy according to the amount of your need.
Then when you have removed those saw fragments, and nothing remains of them, suture the opening of the wound if it is wide; and if not, place a plaster suitable for it on top of it, and let it grow together until it heals.
Concerning the Restoration of the Collarbone When It Is Broken.
The Collarbone is indeed very often broken from the front part near the shoulder, and its fracture occurs according to one of three ways.
For it is either broken and separated into two, besides which saw fragments may occur; and this is easier to restore.
Or so that saw fragments occur in the bone; and this is more difficult to restore.
Or so that there is a fracture with a wound.
And the operation on it when the fracture is without a wound is that you have two assistants present, so that one of them holds the support following the broken Collarbone, and the other extends the neck towards the side.
Then equalize the fracture with your fingers until its form is made as it ought to be; and there should be neither eminence nor concavity in it.
If it needs more extension, then you must place a sphere of cloth or wool under the collarbone of the weak patient; and its size should be according to the amount of your need; extend and elevate the Collarbone, and compress the sphere with your hand until you equalize the fracture as needed.
If you cannot draw the extremity of the Furcula outward because it has reached a depth, then it is necessary that the infirm person be laid on his back and a medium-sized cushion be placed under his shoulder; and let the attendant press his shoulder downward until the os of the Furcula which is deep is raised upward; and then straighten the fracture and equalize it with your fingers.
But if you perceive a splinter from the Furcula, and it moves, then you must cut above it and extract the splinter easily.
But if it is retained in the bone, then apply ingenuity in incising it with one of the forceps which you have prepared for it, after you have placed under the Furcula an instrument that preserves the sifach; and this instrument is made of wood or iron. And this is its form.
It resembles a spoon which has no concavity.
And let its width be according to that for which you need it from the size of the bone and its parity. Its length, however, also as much as is possible for you in the operation.
And let it have two extremities, as you see: and one extremity be wide and the other narrow.
But if the disruption of the wound which you opened when you extracted the bone splinter is wide, and you are cautious of hot abscesses; then join the two lips of the wound with sutures.
And if the disruption is small or you fear hot abscesses; then fill the wound with cloths and lint according to the quantity of the wound's fissure.
But if a hot abscess should occur, then infuse a cloth in rose oil, and vinegar, and wine, and place it upon it.
But when the stricture of the bone is without a wound and without incision it is, as you place upon the bone a plaster made from miller's flour with egg white. And place a soft pledget over it. Then place a sphere under its nipple, if it needs that. Then take a himematem, that is, a wheel which the Saracens hold, which is very long: and let its width be a palm, or thereabouts. Then place a doubled pledget over the pledget and plaster. Then take a splint from a thin board, whose width is three fingers, and similarly in length. Then wrap it in cloth. Then wrap that cloth with the splint in the place of the alhimemati which falls over the fracture and place. Then place the alhimemati over the fracture as it revolves, and wrap it over its neck, and under its sound nipple, and under its unsound nipple: and draw it over all parts, and how you see that the strapping holds the fracture with decent strapping: and this is, that which is not hidden from you, and the whole, so that the splint does not move off the fractured bone. And for this it is necessary, that you look at the sick person every day. Whenever therefore the ligature is softened, and you see the splint already moving: then straighten that, and tighten the ligature.
Then place the sick person's sleep on its back, and put under its nipple at its sleep a small cushion at night, so that it may be raised with it as assistance from its side. The fracture of the clavicle is therefore raised by raising the shoulder.
Or bind its arm to its neck: and do not loosen the ligature unless it should happen in the place an accident from itching, or from an abscess, up to twelve days.
Then renew the plaster, if you see its face towards it. And bind it tight and let it go until it is restored and coagulates.
And indeed a fracture of the clavicle is bound and strengthened for the most part in twenty-eight days, and sometimes it happens in some people in a lesser time.
On the restoration of a scapula fracture.
The scapula is rarely broken, and in its broad part; and its margins are not broken except from it.
Therefore, when a place is broken from it and broken in its middle, and it is not recognized except by touch; then, according to what the fracture figure is, try its preparation. And reduce it to its natural shape in every way possible for you.
Then place powder of mill with egg white on the site, and a soft pledget, and put a poultice from doubled cloth over it. Then place a broad splint from a thin board according to the quantity of the whole scapula, or a little wider.
But if there is a concavity under the splint in any part of the scapula, then equalize it with a soft pledget until the splint descends according to equality.
Then bind over it with a long bandage, with decent constriction and firmness of the splint so that it is not removed from its place.
And consider the ligature every day. Whenever therefore the bandage softens, bind it, and equalize the splint if it is removed from its place; and let the weak person lie on his healthy side.
And indeed the scapula is restored in twenty days, or in twenty-five days.
When therefore this number is completed, then untie the bandage and you will be safe. For it is from bones whose union is not feared, nor their loosening.
If, however, a fragment proceeds from the bone and pricks under the skin: then split above it and remove it. And do what we said in the fracture of the clavicle from the calming of a hot abscess, if anything should happen from it.
On the restoration of a breastbone fracture.
The breastbone is sometimes fractured in its middle, and this rarely happens. Its extremities indeed are most often broken and crushed from accidents.
When its middle is fractured, which inclines downwards, and there occurs to it intense pain, and difficulty in breathing, and coughing: and perhaps he vomits blood, and a concavity is shown in the broken bone, and is not hidden from the sense; The restoration of it is that the sick person be laid on his back; and put pulvinar between his spatulas.
Then press his shoulders and join the ribs from both sides or parts with hands; and make it equal with subtlety, according to every way that it is possible and suits, until the figure of the bone returns, according to what is necessary.
Then put plaster and a wad over it, and put a splint from thin wood from willow, or elder, and such like in lightness on top of it, after you have wrapped it in cloth. Then make subtlety in binding it over the broken bone so that it does not move; and go with a bandage according to its roundness to the back many times, and constrict it with decent tightness.
Then consider the bandage every hour, and whenever it softens, tighten it; and if its need provokes to loosen it at itching or corruption which occurs in the place or pain or abscess: then hurry and loosen it, and remove the plaster, and rectify what happens with a method of its treatment.
Then apply a plaster if you see that it is fitting for it and add a bandage to it until it heals.
On the Restoration of Ribs, When They Are Broken.
Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in thick places which follow the back and from their extremities on the front side. And attrition does not happen to them unless it is because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the senses upon inquiry with the fingers.
And its restoration is done in such a way that you equalize the fracture with your fingers as much as possible until the shape is equalized, according to what is necessary. Then apply plasters and bind the broken bone with splints if it needs it.
And if the fracture of the ribs is sloping inward: then there occurs severe pain and a stabbing sensation, like the stabbing sensation that occurs to one who has pleurisy: because the bone pierces the membrane, and he also experiences difficulty breathing and coughing, and vomiting blood frequently; and this is difficult to cure.
And the ancients have already devised many remedies for it, and among them are those who say that you should give the patient foods which produce inflammation and windiness so that the abdomen becomes inflamed and extended, and the fracture is pushed outward.
We, however, forbid it lest a hot abscess be quickly made if it does not already exist. But if it has already occurred, then it adds to it.
And some of them said: place something windy on top of the spot, and then suck it out with force, and this is similar reasoning. However, it is feared that the windiness will attract superfluities to the spot because of the weakened condition.
And some of them said: it is necessary that the place be covered with wool which has already been soaked in warm oil: and poultices should be placed between the ribs until it is filled so that there will be an equal bandage when you wrap it according to its roundness.
Then let the weak patient be treated for pleurisy with diet and medicine.
If a strong matter constricts the patient, which he cannot bear, and pricks the mouth with piercing membrane, and we fear for the patient: then it is necessary that we cleave over the place and expose the broken rib. Then let us place upon it an instrument which retains the silk, a remembrance of which has preceded; and let us cut open the mouth with ease, and cut it itself.
Then let us join together the two lips of the wound, if it is large with suture; and let us treat it with plasters until it heals.
But if a hot abscess should happen at the same time, then hurry and pour little poultices in rose oil and put them on the spot; and let the patient be treated with that which suits an abscess.
Meanwhile also let him lie supine upon the side upon which he sleeps until it heals.
On the restoration of a fracture of the vertebrae of the back and neck.
Indeed a fracture sometimes happens to the bones of the neck, and attrition rarely happens to them; and similarly to the vertebrae of the back also. Therefore when it happens to someone, and you wish to know whether it will heal or not: then consider. For if you see his hands already softened and stunned and dead; and he cannot move them nor extend them nor constrict them; and when you constrict them with your fingers, and prick them with a sharp point, he does not feel it, and does not feel pain in them: then know that it will not heal, and is mortal in most dispositions.
But if he moves them and feels constriction in them with fingers and pricking: then know that the vertebrae of the neck are safe, and that the patient will be healed with treatment.
If it should happen with a spinal injury like that, and you wish to know whether it will be healed or not: then consider its feet; then if you see that they have become softened, and there occurs in them what occurs in the hands; then when he lies on his back, flatulence and defecation exit without volition; and when he is turned over onto his stomach, defecation exits without volition; and when he is turned over onto his back again, and he wishes to urinate but cannot: then know that it is mortal. Therefore do not labor in its treatment.
But if none of that happens to him, the matter is lighter.
And the treatment of what happens from that is, to try sedative fomentations of hot poultice: so that you place on the fractured spine rose oil alone: or with yolks well cooked.
Place on it that several times a day until when the hot poultice is sedated: then place on the place one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it over it with a bandage: and order the sick person to use quietude and tranquility. And let him not sleep on the side on which he finds pain until he is healed.
But if it should happen at the abrasion of bone that is shattered, or something which already becomes separated from it: then it is necessary that you cut upon the skin and remove that. Then join together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with suture. Then care for it with some flesh-producing substance, from ointments, until it is healed.
But if the last bone of the coccyx is fractured and it is the end of the tail: then it is necessary that you insert the thumb of your left hand into the anus and equalize the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible, and by a second equalization.
Then place it on top and remove it, and care for the wound with the care that preceded it until it heals.
On the Restoration of a Wound.
Chapter Eleven.
Rarely are the bones of a wound broken. But if they are broken, then their fracture is not anything but a comminution at their ends; and they split lengthwise and incline towards the inside; and there occurs a feeble pain in the place, and stinging; and the leg which is broken becomes numb.
And its restoration indeed is that you extend your hand over it until you stand over the fracture as its shape is.
But if the fracture is only at its ends, then equalize that fracture according to what is prepared for you from equality until it resembles its natural shape.
But if the fracture is lengthwise or has already inclined inwards, then make the weak person lie on their stomach until preparation for the restoration of that fracture is ready for you. Therefore, when you equalize it, place a plaster over it; then place a splint made of wood or leather over it; and bind it tight with a binding which you do not fear will cause the fracture to change position or the splint to be removed.
And equalize the concavity of those with something which fills it until the binding takes it according to equality; and order the weak person to sleep on their back or on their healthy side.
But if a hot abscess should occur to it; then stop from extending it and its restoration until the hot abscess subsides; and place what subsided over it according to what preceded, then return to its restoration; and bind it as is necessary.
But if a bone becomes loose or breaks apart, remove it.
On the Restoration of a Fracture of the Assistant Bone
That is an assistant, which is between the elbow and the head of the spatula.
Therefore, if it is broken, its restoration is according to one of two methods.
One of which is: that you take a flat piece of wood of medium thickness, according to this form, which follows.
And two ligatures are tied at the two ends.
Then it is suspended from an elevated place, and the patient sits upon a seat. Then he should project his broken arm onto the wood until it reaches its middle, in which the curve of the wood is attached.
Then suspend something heavy from above it so that it extends the whole thing downwards. Then the physician straightens the fracture with his hands at the same time until the fracture returns as it should be.
And the other method is that the patient lies on his back and his hand is suspended from his neck with a ligature. Then instruct two assistants, that one of them should hold that which is above the fracture with his hands and that the other should hold below it; and let each one extend towards their own side.
And if you wish for a stronger extension, then bind below the fracture with a ligature and above it with another ligature; and let each of the two assistants extend them towards their own two sides.
If therefore the fracture is near the extremity of the shoulder, it is necessary that one ligature be placed below the head and another below the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow, it is necessary that a ligature be placed above that place and above the elbow itself.
Then straighten the fracture with ease without exertion until when the fracture is equalized as it should be and a good dressing is applied; then bind it if a hot swelling does not occur.
If, however, a hot abscess occurs, then loosen the bandage until the seventh day. And place upon it wool dipped in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess subsides; then bind it. And the manner of binding it is to place a plaster over the fracture.
Then place an application from new cloth over the plaster. Then let him bind his arm upon the support and place his open hand upon his shoulder.
And place a cloth and bind it upon the support so that the arm remains in the place of the stars; if nothing prevents you from doing so, nor anything changes over the broken bone.
But if you fear that something might change over the broken bone, then use a splint; and it is to place upon the fracture itself a splint which is wider and stronger than the other splints. And place the width of a finger between every splint; and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with the addition of three fingers on each side.
Then bind upon the splints the bandage which I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your bandage be tighter over the place of the fracture. And the longer the fracture extends, the looser the bandage should be.
Therefore, if you see the position of the splints and bandage, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the limb immediately do so; and if you fear a hot abscess, then loosen the bandage and splints until the seventh day, as we have said.
Then consider the bandage every three days so that itching or swelling does not occur in the place, nor is food prevented from reaching the limb because of the abundance of the bandage. Therefore correct it all according to what we have said.
But if you are confident that nothing will happen from it; then do not loosen the bandage except after three days or more.
Let the sick man lie on his back and let his hands be upon his stomach; and put under him a bolster filled with wool evenly.
And consider every hour of the night or day that the shape of the broken limb is not loosened, or that the ligament is not softened. Therefore rectify it all with your strength.
And put food for the sick man according to the order which we have prescribed, so that it be subtle food at first until he begins to bind his mouth; then it is necessary that you thicken his food.
For by custom of the helper and leg it is to be bound for forty days; then therefore it is necessary that it be loosened, and a bath be given, and be treated with ointments which rectify it.
But if the fracture is foul and crushed; then do not loosen from it the bandage and splints for up to fifty days, and even up to two months.
Concerning the Restoration of a Fracture of the Arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called two humeri.
Of which one is small and it is that which follows the thumb. And the other is large, and it is that which is placed under the small one from the lower part.
Therefore perhaps only the larger humerus is broken, or the smaller one; and perhaps they are broken together.
When therefore the smaller humerus above is broken, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the lower humerus is broken, its fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And worse is it when the two bones are broken together.
If therefore the bone which is broken is the smaller humerus above, then it behooves the doctor at its restoration to put a small extension with ease until it equals itself.
If, however, the large bone is fractured: then it is necessary that he should apply a stronger splint.
And it is necessary that he should apply the shape of the hand at its restoration, and its extended extension upon a cushion. And let the thumb of the hand be higher than all the fingers towards the superiors: and let the lower joint be lower than all the fingers, or the rest: and a weak sitting square upon itself, and let the cushion be before it, or in its direction, at a height, so that the weak one does not incur labor.
Then let the attendant extend the arm from the lower part, or with his hand, or with a ligament. And let another attendant extend similarly from above.
Then let the physician equalize the bone, until he reduces it according to the best shape that he can.
And if in the fracture of the bone there are splinters, then endeavor to reduce all fragments into their place by your strength.
But if a separated splinter appears in it and pricks the skin, and you have no hope of its restoration: then cut upon it, and remove it according to the way that we said in those things which are preceding.
But if the fracture is with a wound, I have already made a separate chapter for that, therefore take its treatment from there.
But if a hot abscess should happen at the beginning of your restoration, then make a cloth with cerate made from rose oil and white wax, and let it be medium between thickness and subtlety: and bind the cloth upon it with a fine bandage, until the abscess subsides: then remove the cerate, and apply a plaster prepared from flour powder with egg white. Then place stars, and let the star which is placed upon the fracture itself be a little wider and stronger.
And know that the number of stars for the arm is six in most arrangements: whether the fracture is in one bone or in two bones at the same time.
Then place your bandage over the place of the fracture stronger and more tightly, and somewhat higher with the bandage above the fracture, or below it; or place a softer bandage on the same side, according to the previous recollection mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And let the cloths which are wrapped over the fracture be soft, damp cloths; and not hard, rough ones. And let the thread with which it is tied be of flax properly, medium between fine and coarse, as we have described.
And consider the limb and the bandage after a few days. And if anything should happen of which correction is necessary, such as itching which occurs in the limb: then it is necessary that you bathe the limb with warm water until the itching subsides, and you release the limb unconstrained until it subsides, then repeat the bandage.
And if the bandage has already become softened, and the bone already moved, and similar things to these: then correct all that by your own skill, and consider again.
For if nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb, because of excess bandage, then it is necessary that you soften it a little, and release it for several days until nourishment flows to it, then tighten it.
But if none of the things which we have said happen to the weak one, then it is not necessary that it be loosened except after twenty days, or thereabouts.
Then let the weak one's hand be suspended to his neck. And let his neck be equal, and let it be guarded by his own strength from agitated movements. And make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days, or in thirty-two days; and perhaps it is restored in twenty-eight days. All of that is according to the dispositions of complexions, and dispositions of strength.
On the Restoration of Fractures of the Hand
Know that fractures of the ribs of the hand and the knuckles of the fingers rarely occur. And it does not happen to them unless there is much rubbing.
Therefore, when a fracture or rubbing of the sole occurs, it is necessary for the weakling to sit down and for there to be a seat in front of him according to equality. Then place his hand on it extended.
Then let the attendant extend the broken bones, and let the physician equalize them until they are joined together in a good conjunction.
Then it is necessary to place a plaster and wad if a hot abscess does not occur. Then place a splint on top according to the quantity of the area, and you have already wrapped it in linen cloth.
But if the fracture is near the belly of the sole, then make a sphere-like thing from cloth and order the weakling to press upon it with his fractured sole; then let it be tied with a long cloth.
And let the splint be made from leather, in which there is softness so that the leather may be applied to the body of the sole; and bind it as needed.
But if the fracture is on the outside, it is necessary to place a splint on top and another splint from beneath in the sole; and let the hand be open and straight. Then put a bandage, as the hand is turned over; and extend between the fingers with a ligament.
But if it happens that a fracture occurs to any of the knuckles of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, equalize it as needed. Then bind it with the sole; and if you wish, place a small straight splint for it so that the fracture may be raised and not moved.
But if the fracture is in the remaining fingers, such as the middle finger, index finger, or ring finger and little finger, then equalize it and bind it with the healthy finger that follows it; or let them all be bound according to continuity, and this is better. Or place a small plaster on it, as we said for the thumb.
And consider in your restoration, and after the placement of the hot poultice: and oppose it with what is necessary when something occurs from it, according to as its account is repeated.
On the Restoration of a Hip Fracture.
The hip bone is often fractured, and it is revealed to the senses because it turns to the inner and rear part.
And its restoration is done in such a way that a ligature is tightened above the fracture, and another ligature below the fracture. And the patient should lie face down.
Then let the minister extend all the ligatures to their proper side according to equality: and this, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if the fracture is near the root of the hip, then let the ligature be on the side of the pectineal muscle so that the extension falls upward: and another ligature below the fracture.
And thus similarly if the fracture is near the knee, then let the ligature be near the knee so that the extension is downward.
Then let the physician equalize the bone with both of his hands until he reduces it according to the likeness of the natural shape: and let the bone be joined with a good conjunction.
Then it is necessary that you place a plaster and bandage, if an abscess does not occur in the limb. But if an abscess occurs in it: then let it alone for several days until the hot abscess subsides, then return to your treatment.
The bandage of it should be thus. It is necessary that you wrap a hard linen cloth, that is, a bandage, over the fracture; and double it twice, or three times: and let there be a surplus from it. Then wrap the leg until the heel reaches the root of the ankle.
And insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg near the knee to the lower parts, and let the ends of the thread come from the upper part of the two parts. Then roll over the leg and thigh what is left over from the splint.
Then place on the thigh in the place of the fracture itself splints, and place one splint from them over the bone of the leg.
Then fill the vacancies between the leg and thigh with soft cloths, so that the tightness is equal.
Then begin with strong binding from the middle above the place of the fracture with three or four windings. And the more you extend with the bandage from the place of the fracture, let your binding be less and softer, and gentler.
Then attend to the two ends of the thread which you inserted between the thigh and the leg. Therefore tie with both three splints which are above. Then go with the two ends of the thread to the lower parts, until you reach the heel of the foot. And with both tighten also the ends of the splints from the other side, so that the bandage is not removed from its place.
Then let the binding remain on it as long as it stays, so that neither corrosion nor abscess nor swelling nor anything like them happen to the limb. But if something of that kind should happen. Therefore hurry with its resolution and correct everything that happens from it completely, according to what we have said many times.
But if there is a fragment of bone in the bone that pierces: then it is necessary, if it is possible for you, to equalize that. And if not, bind over it and remove it; and care for it with a memory of what preceded, until it heals.
And sometimes this fracture of the hip is held together, in addition to which stars are added to it, as we said in the auxiliary and arm.
However, in its restoration thus fractured, infirm lameness does not occur. And if it is restored alone, except that another leg is applied to it, then it is necessary that he who owns it always limps.
And know that the hip is held together for fifty days, or a little is added, or a little is diminished: all of that is according to the diversity of complexions, and other dispositions.
On the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap.
Know that a fracture of the kneecap rarely occurs, but attrition often happens to it.
But if a fracture does occur to it, then it is nothing but either a fissure or a hole in its parts. And it is that with a wound, and without a wound. And the whole thing stands upon it with sensation.
And its restoration is such that what is disrupted from its parts is equalized with the fingers until it comes together and is joined according to what is possible from equality and ease and fabrication.
Then place a plaster from sesame flour, or millstone, with egg white: and place a round star on top of it if that is needed: and bind a suitable ligature on top of it for that.
Then consider all the dispositions which we have narrated in the other fractures: such as a hot poultice, and things similar to it: so that you oppose every accident with what suits it until it is healed.
On the restoration of a fracture of the leg.
Know that the leg has two bones, one of which is thick and is called by the name Leg: and the other slender and is called Fibula.
And it happens with both kinds of fractures that it happens to two bones of the arm; and for this reason, its restoration is done just like the restoration of an arm equally, and the operation is one.
If two bones are broken at the same time, the leg is turned in all directions.
And if a slender bone is broken, the leg is turned to the front part.
And if a thicker bone is broken, you will find it below; and it is among those that are not hidden from you.
Then apply extension, and equalization, and ligation of the stars according to that equally.
However, it is necessary, if the fracture of the leg is a foul fracture, having many splinters: that there be less extension, and gentler alleviation by you.
And in the leg indeed there is something more from the operation than in the arm; and it is that when you equalize the stars, and complete all your operation, then take two bandages from pine wood, which is administered in the making of sun dials that are put under boards; and they are made from palm spatulas; and choose from them those which have a small thickness, and are not from the smallest ones: and let the length of them be according to the length of the leg from the knee downward.
Then wrap upon each cloth with two wrappings according to its length. And put one part of the leg from one side, and the other from the other side; and let them be from the knee downward to the foot.
Then tie the two bandages in three places from the two ends and the middle. For when constriction is forbidden, the leg inclines to the right and left, and stands in a good position.
And now indeed let a crib be administered from wood according to the length of the leg, and let the leg be placed in it, so that it preserves it from motion.
And indeed it is very necessary that you do this in a fracture when there is a wound with it properly.
Then consider the leg every day and strive with the greatest care to keep it free from abscess, or swelling, or other things. If, therefore, any of those things should happen, then oppose them with what is necessary until it is healed, if God wills.
Of fractures of the bones of the foot and toes.
A fracture of the heel bone does not often occur.
Fractures sometimes happen to the bones of the foot and rarely to the toes; they do not occur except by attrition in many positions.
And if a fracture should happen to the bones of the foot and you see those bones rise up over one another, then let the patient place his foot on prepared ground, as if walking.
Then stand and place your foot on that which is raised from those bones; then press or tread it down and equalize it until it returns to its place.
Then apply a plaster and put a splint over it; and place under the sole of the foot a small board with two flat heads.
Then bind it with a proper bandage after you have wrapped it in cloths and other things as needed.
When three or four days have passed, then untie the bandage. For you will find the bones equalized, whether they were broken or dislocated. The operation on them is therefore as you see.
But if any of the toes are broken, then restore them and equalize them according to what I have told you about the restoration of the fingers of the hand. Then place with your finger a splint along the length of the toe and let it be a little wider; then place under the foot this board which I have told you about, and bind it with a proper bandage.
If, however, what is broken is two, three, or more bones, then place upon each finger a splint of its size, wrapped in linen cloth; and bind the board under the foot; and let it stand on one head of the board outside the belly of the foot, so that it may hold with good retention.
And it behooves you not to forget to consider all that I have said to you in the remaining fractures from the accidents we mentioned; and oppose every accident with what is necessary.
Concerning the fracture of a woman's vulva, and the bone of the breastbone, and the man's penis bone.
When a woman's vulva is fractured, then make her sit squarely. Then incline her somewhat toward her own back, and let her be held back.
Then let the midwife fill her vulva with cotton until it is full; and let it be made in the vulva like a sphere from this.
Then let the woman be shaken, and raise her back gradually. For the cotton will come out until it is made before the vulva's gate like a sphere, and the broken bone returns.
Then place a cushion upon her back. When, therefore, she wishes to urinate, let her remove the cotton with ease, then urinate; and put it back according to the manner in which you first inserted it; then let her return to her first cushion.
Let her do this for seven days, or thereabouts, for the bone itself is restored.
And if you wish, take a bladder of a sheep, and bind a reed tube over its opening; and insert the whole bladder into her vulva. Then blow into the tube with force until the bladder is inflated within the vulva, for the fracture returns.
Then it should be filled with cotton and left for several days, as we have said, until it heals.
And when the bone of the breastbone of a man or woman is broken, then apply in its restoration and its equalizing that which we have said about the bone of the shoulder blade.
And the rectum should not be concealed in these nearby fractures, which rarely occur, especially for someone who has some study or practice.
And understand this book of mine well, for the fracture itself indicates to you in many positions the straight path in its restoration and its union; therefore understand.
But when the rod of a man is broken, take a goose's neck; and insert the rod into it. Then place an envelopment of cloth over it, and let it be wrapped up, and leave it for three days, or thereabouts, and it will heal, if God wills.
On the restoration of a fracture of bones when there is a wound.
It is fitting for one to whom a fracture occurs with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the hip bone or thigh bone or similar to them, that you hasten and let blood from him immediately; if conditions for bloodletting are attested to you, as we have previously stated.
But if the wound is flowing blood, then it is necessary that you hasten to cut away from it so that you sprinkle powdered charcoal over it; if you do not have anything else present.
Then begin to restore the fracture on that same day and do not delay it unless an abscess occurs.
But if a hot abscess occurs, then defer its restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess subsides. And do not approach it on the third and fourth days at all, for you would cause bad things to happen to him.
If, however, the fractured jawbone is prominent above the skin exposed, then it is necessary that you try to reduce it and equalize it with your hands with ease and little extension.
If, however, its extension is not prepared, and its equalization by your hands: then reduce it with this instrument. And it is an instrument made of iron, whose length is the quantity of seven fingers, or eight: and its width is according to the quantity of the wound. And for this reason it is necessary for the physician to take three or four from them according to the quantity needed for that cure in every kind of fracture.
And let it be round: and let there be a small thickness in it so that it is not doubled upon compression on it in the hour of the operation: and let it have an acute extremity, which has a margin at its extremities. And let it be above its thickness from its middle up to its lower parts.
And this is its shape.
It is necessary in this operation that the acute curved extremity of it be placed on the extremity of the prominent bone and press it with it together until the jaw returns and is equalized in some way.
Therefore try to equalize the extremities of the fracture to each other.
And if the extremities of it are fractured finely and do not receive good acceptance by the instrument, then it is necessary that you cut the extremity of that bone until the instrument has power over it.
But if you are not able to reduce them altogether with what we have described, then cut it with what suits it from the Incisions which we have mentioned or saw it with a saw in whatever way is possible for you.
Then scrape away that which remains in the bone from roughness and fine cortexes.
When therefore the jaw is reduced and finds violent vehement pain after its reduction, then you know that the jaw has not returned to its natural place.
Therefore do that. For you bestow a great benefit on the sick man when you complete the restoration of the bone which you make.
Then immerse the cloth in black wine vinegar. And especially if it is summer. And do not place a bandage on the wound which contains wax, nor anything in which there is oil: so that you do not cause putrefaction and decay to occur in it.
Then administer splints in the hour of your completion of the restoration of the bone. And let the wound be left open; so that you may make an incision with forceps into the folds according to the size of the wound.
And be careful with all caution not to constrict the wound with a fracture. For very often foolish doctors have done this, and they have caused death, or decay, or gangrene, that is, a spreading sore, to occur upon their patients. And let your binding be soft, gentle, different from the binding of other fractures.
But if the wound is bad, or it is a large wound, and you fear some evil accidents which we have described upon it, and you find pain in the place hanging: then it is not necessary that you should put splints upon it. And make for them folds out of hard cloths in place of the splints, and bind it with them.
But when it is after one day, or two days, and you see the wound already beginning to generate pus in it: then remove from on top of it the cloth which you placed upon it with wine. Then administer bandages and ointments with which we are accustomed to treat wounds: such as the tetrapharmacum ointment and those similar to it.
And it behooves you to loosen the bandage. And consider the wound every day in the morning and evening until it consolidates and heals.
And it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that the pus flows from it to the lower parts with ease.
If many days pass and the wound does not heal and the pus is not separated from it, then know that there are small bone fragments there. Therefore you must inquire into the wound with your hand. But however many of those bone fragments are separate, remove them and extract them yourself. And those which are not separate and prick the limb and cause pain to occur, try to cut into them and remove them in any way possible for you to do so.
But if it should happen that the wound becomes infected, or gangrenous, that is, estiomenus, or another species of corruption and putrefaction: then it is necessary that you oppose to each of these what suits it from its treatment, of which a preceding account was given in its chapter.
And from this point on which my speech must stand and to which you should direct your mind when a bone is broken and protrudes above the limb, such as the thighbone and the fibula and those similar to them from large limbs, it is, that you do not presume to pull it back, for very often death results from this, but rather let it be until it putrefies.
For perhaps it will fall off by itself after twenty or thirty days.
Then therefore treat the wound if it seems right to you, and if not, leave it alone.
Concerning the treatment of nodules in the scar after a fracture.
Very often this nodulation occurs in the scar after healing of a fracture. Especially that which is near the joints and disfigures the shape of the limb from it. And perhaps it prevents the limb from its natural function.
Therefore consider then if the nodulation is recent, administer to it medicines which have astringency, such as aloes and frankincense and myrrh and sarcocolla and acacia and those similar to them.
So that you may take some of these, or all of them, and mix them with vinegar, or with egg white, or with vinegar; and lay them upon the swelling on a wad, and bind them tightly over it.
And leave the binding, and do not loosen it for many days. Then loosen it, and apply another, until the swelling is removed.
Or bind a sheet of lead over it firmly. For lead has the property of removing everything that is feared from the limbs.
But if the swelling has already turned to stone, and is tight, and urgent necessity calls for its removal: then make an incision over it from its upper part, and cut away the excess that protrudes: or shave it with certain razors, until it is removed; and tend to it until it heals.
Concerning the healing when it is restored, and the limb remains beneath it subtle, not according to its nature.
When a fracture of a bone is healed, and the limb remains after it subtle, weak; then it does not happen except for many causes. One of which is the multiplicity of loosening of the ligament and its binding not as it should be: or because of excess tightness of the ligaments' bindings, until nourishment is prevented from running to the limb; or because of too much application of embrocations at an unfitting time; or because of scarcity of blood in the body of the weak person, and its debility.
And its cure is to feed the weak person, and make his body tender, until blood is multiplied in it. And administer a bath. And introduce joy and gladness upon him.
Then lay pitch over the limb: so that the pitch may draw much nourishment to it. And diligently apply embrocation of it with warm water, until nourishment flows and it returns to its natural form.
On the treatment of broken bones when they are restored crooked.
When it happens that crookedness and eminence of the broken bone, or a knot, occur in a limb already restored after its healing, and the form of the limb is spoiled thereby, yet the limb is not prevented from its natural operation, then you ought not to listen to him who thinks that the limb should be broken again.
And there have already been many foolish physicians and setters who have done this in our land.
And this operation is truly very blameworthy, leading to death, or great fear, so that it may be mortal.
But if the limping and knotting are recent, then it is necessary that it be bathed with warm water, in which softening herbs have been boiled, such as leaves of the mallow, and its root, and melilot, and those like them. And let a plaster be made for it with a softening plaster, such as well-made diachylon.
Or let the mucilage of mallow root be taken and shaken with hen fat, or sesame oil, and plastered with it.
Or let plump figs be taken and rubbed with dove's dung, and similar things which are called from medicines that lessen consolidation.
And sometimes the knot is loosened with persistent, ancient, and gentle friction, which is done with wet hands. And let motion be given to the limb to every part in all hours.
But if the crookedness has already preceded and become strong, and has been converted into stone, and necessity has arisen for its treatment with iron, then it is necessary that it be cut above it, and the continuity of the bone be loosened, and what overflows from the knot or bone be cut off with fine incisors; and ease be given to it with care and diligence.
Concerning Speech in Dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of any joint from its place. Therefore it is prohibited from its motion and the figure of the limb is deformed. And it causes severe pains and violent injuries to befall the weak one.
Therefore, when dislocation happens to someone, it is necessary to hasten its restoration and not delay it at all.
For if it is delayed, the place becomes inflamed and perhaps the reduction of the dislocation with it.
Therefore, it should not be moved nor extended during the hour of its inflammation. For it often causes spasms and painful injuries to occur.
But when that happens, you must hurry to the phlebotomy of the weak one. Then let it be dismissed until the inflammation subsides.
Then let the limb be embrocated with warm water and oil. Then let it be reduced with ease.
And let all the limb be treated with it so that the recollection of which will come to its place.
I have indeed already arranged the chapters of dislocation, even according to what preceded in the fracture, from the upper part of the body down to its lower part.
Concerning the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
The two jaws rarely dislocate unless rarely.
And the dislocation of both occurs according to one of two ways. For either they are moved from their places by a small removal and softened a little. Or they are dislocated by a complete dislocation until they soften to the chest part, until the saliva of the weak one flows and he cannot hold it nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is enveloped with speech.
But when its dislocation is small, then it returns in many positions by itself with little effort.
But if the dislocation is complete, entire: then it is necessary that its reduction be administered quickly and not delayed at all: and it is for the attendant to hold the head of the weak one; and for the physician to insert the thumb of his own hand into the root of the mandible of the dislocation between his mouth, if the dislocation is from one side. Or he inserts his two thumbs together, if the dislocation is from both sides. And let the remaining fingers of his hands be outside, with which he equalizes.
And instruct the weak one to cleanse his mandibles and open them for eating on every side. And the physician equalizes the mandible and pushes the mandible until it returns to its place.
And if its reduction is difficult, especially if both mandibles are together; then administer steaming with warm water and oil until an easy reduction of both is made: and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
When therefore they return and are equalized and the mouth of the weak one is closed and they do not soften; then place poultices of cloths on them with cerate which is made from wax and rose oil.
Then it is bound easily with soft bandages.
And let the sleep of the weak one be on his back; and let his head stand between two pillows so that he does not move it to the right and left; nor does he try or is forced to chew anything: but rather let his food be a gentle sipping until when the pains are removed and the mandible is knotted; then let him eat what he wants and let it be administered easily.
Let him not labor upon the operation of his mouth at eating and drinking and kissing until the mandible is united and healed.
But if the reduction of the two mandibles becomes difficult when they are dislocated at some hour and do not return to their places, then fevers and continuous sweats often happen; and perhaps the belly of the sick person is loosened, and perhaps he vomits pure bile.
Therefore when you see that, know that it is destruction and he to whom it happens often dies in ten days.
Concerning the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and extremity of the shoulder.
The clavicle indeed does not dislocate from the inner side on account of its continuity with the chest. And it sometimes dislocates to the outer side, and that is declared by sensation.
And its restoration is, for the sick person to lie on his back and extend his arms. Then constrict the place with your palm in a strong constriction, for it will return by itself.
Then put a plaster upon it and poultices, and bind it.
The extremities indeed which follow the elbow and are continuous with it do not dislocate except rarely. But if it dislocates on some day, then it is necessary that it be reduced and equalized according to what we have said and what is prepared for you.
Then put a plaster upon it and poultices and a binding. And advise the sick person to adhere to tranquility and quiet until he heals.
And with this same treatment the extremity of the shoulder is reduced when it also separates from its place.
Concerning the reduction of the dislocation of the shoulder.
Know that the humerus does not dislocate except according to three ways.
One of them is to dislocate it towards the side of the fibula below. The second is to dislocate it towards the chest. And perhaps it may be dislocated to the upper part of the humerus, and that happens rarely.
And it does not dislocate backwards because of the spatula. And it does not dislocate forwards because of the nerves.
Indeed, it most often dislocates and comes out below towards the fibula, especially in those whose flesh is scant. Because it goes out quickly in them and goes back in quickly.
But in those whose flesh is plentiful, it is the opposite of that, namely because it goes out with difficulty and goes back in with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some people that a blow or fall occurs and the humerus becomes inflamed with a hot inflammation, and it is thought because of that that it has already been dislocated.
Therefore, you ought to test it until you stand on the certainty of it, and then proceed with its treatment.
And dislocation is recognized when it is below towards the fibula, and you distinguish between a dislocated humerus and a sound humerus. For you find a manifest difference between them, and you find in the head of the humerus a concavity, and under the fibula at the touch the head of the humerus as if it were an egg itself: and the weak person cannot bring the hand to his ear, nor move it with all motions.
And similarly, if it dislocates towards the chest or upwards: then you find a manifest touch and it is not concealed.
And the reduction of this dislocation is indeed easy when it is recent or when the person is a weak child.
And its reduction is that the attendant raises his hand upwards. Then place your thumbs under his clavicle, and elevate the fracture with strength upwards to its place; and let the assistant raise his hand and extend it upwards. Then let him put it down below, for he returns quickly.
But if he does not return through what we have said, and there have been many days from the beginning since the dislocation occurred: then it is necessary that the sick man bathe in warm water, and an embrocation be administered which softens and soothes, such as if the roots of marshmallow, fenugreek, and melilot are decocted in water and administered.
Then let the sick man be laid on his back; and let a sphere and wool be placed under his clavicle, which is equal between softness and firmness.
Then let the physician place his heel on the sphere, and elevate the head of the humerus with strength, and draw the hand of the sick man downwards.
And if you wish, reduce him according to this method: and it is that you make a man who is taller than the sick man be present, and let him stand on the side, and insert his shoulder under the clavicle of the sick man; and elevate the clavicle upwards until the sick man is suspended in the air. And let another assistant draw the hand of the sick man downwards towards his belly. But if the sick man is light: then it is necessary that he be suspended with something else so that he becomes heavy; for the dislocation returns immediately.
And it is also reduced according to another method: and it is that a long piece of wood be fixed into the ground, whose head is round in shape: such as the handle of a mortar: which is neither thick nor thin. Then let it be placed under the sick man after soft cloths are placed on top of the head of the wood; and let the sick man stand according to the length of the wood.
Then let his hand be extended downwards on one side, and let his body be extended on the other side with force; for the junction returns to its place with speed.
But if its reduction is difficult by all that we have said, then use this care: and it is, that you take wood whose length is the measure of two arms, and its width the measure of four fingers, and its thickness the measure of two fingers: which has a round head, so that its entry is eased into the depth of the bone, according to this form.
Then soft cloths are tied over the round head so that the wood does not injure the weak flesh.
Then let it be placed under the weak bone so that the hand or arm is extended upon the wood up to the lower parts; and let the wood be tied over the support, the arm, and the end of the hand.
Then let the arm be placed upon the step of a ladder for its width, and let the hand be extended downwards, and let the remaining body be left hanging from the other side. For the junction enters immediately.
Therefore when its entry is completed according to whichever way is possible: then it is necessary that you put under the bone a sphere of equal size from wool. Then place a plaster prepared from miller's powder with frankincense and albumin over the whole shoulder, just as it rolls down from above.
Then bind under the bone with a decent bandage; and let the bandage be rolled over the plaster from above; and attach his hand to his neck, and let it go, and do not move his hand for seven days.
And it is necessary that little food be given to the weak one until the limb is strengthened; for it is quicker for its healing.
Then let a wider bandage be put on after seven days, or five, and he should be raised with motion. If therefore it is hardened and is not softened, then it is already healed.
But if the junction dislocates many times, because of the moisture that happens to it or because of another cause: then it is necessary that a cautery with three holes be administered in it, according to what has been previously stated in the chapter on cautery.
But if all this is done, and the ligament is loosened after seven days, and the junction is not confirmed, and the plaster and constriction are returned upon it several times, and it is not made firm, and it falls, and it cannot be raised to the upper parts: then know that its nerves which are at the head of the humerus have already been cut or stretched or softened: and know that the junction will never be fixed in its place.
But reduction of the dislocation which occurs towards the chest and nipple, or to the back, is made with a thrust and extension with the hands: until it returns, and the remaining constriction and care are administered in it until it is healed.
But if it should happen after healing that there is heaviness in the limb and slowness in its motion, then let the weak person bathe many times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its former nature.
On the treatment of dislocation of the elbow.
Know that the elbow joint dislocates with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty also: and indeed it dislocates to all sides and especially to the front or to the back.
And its dislocation is not hidden from you: because it falls under sight and under touch, according to whichever shape it dislocates. And when you join the dislocated elbow with the sound one, it is declared to you manifestly. For the joint becomes concave and the arm cannot bend nor touch its own shoulder with it.
And it is necessary that you hurry and reduce the dislocation immediately, before a hot abscess occurs to him.
For if a hot abscess occurs to him, its reduction becomes difficult; and perhaps it does not heal at all, especially when it is towards the back. For it is worse than all kinds of dislocations, and of more violent pain to them; and very often death comes down with it.
And the restoration of it when it is from those which are possible to reduce, is that his hand be extended with two hands: and his arm be spread out, and the hands of the physician be above the elbow and below it, and he presses the joint with the thumbs of his hands together, or with the base of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Or truly the dislocation is to the front: then it returns thus, that he doubles his hand with his own hand, until he strikes with the base of his palm the elbow which is dislocated.
But if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer strong, vehement extension; and it is that two attendants extend the arm: and two other attendants also hold it fast so that it is not moved during the extension.
Then let the arm be revolved to every part after it is wrapped over his hand a doubled long cloth, or a wide bandage.
And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, let him anoint it with oil: so that it be one of those things which aid in the lubrication of the joint with ease. Then he presses the joint with a vehement thrust, until it returns.
And after its reduction it is necessary that a plaster be placed upon it, in which there is astringency, and drying with white of egg; and let it be bound with a decent bandage. And let the arm be suspended from the neck of the sick person: and dismiss him for several days.
Then let it be loosened. If therefore the junction is secured in its place, then loosen the ligature from it and let it go.
And if you see the junction not well constricted, then repeat the plaster and the ligature and let it go for several days until it is constricted. Then loosen it.
But if it happens to have heaviness after the reduction of the junction and the disposition is in motion: then administer moisture in a bath and delicate friction and compression until it becomes straight or place on the junction a plaster, that is, fattened lamb's caul. Then let it be ligated and leave it upon it day and night. Then remove it and introduce it into a bath. When therefore it sweats, then rub the junction with temperate friction. Then repeat upon it lamb's caul juice once, and a second time, and a third time with the entry into the bath until it is softened.
And if you wish, place upon it cow dung, moist, heated with butter and bind it on top of it.
Do that several times. For it is softened and returns to its own disposition.
On the treatment of dislocation by Albucasis.
Albucasis often dislocates the hand that is, the junction which is between the arm and the hand.
And the reduction of its dislocation is easy. Contrary to the rest of the junctions. However it is necessary that there be swiftness in the reduction of its dislocation within the hour in which it dislocated before an abscess occurs: or heat should occur in it.
And the reduction of the dislocation in it is that you place Albucasis' hand infirm on a table and let the assistant extend his hand and let the doctor put his palm on top of the eminence of the junction and push it until it returns.
However, it is necessary that it be considered whether the palm has already receded to the belly of the hand; then let the infirm place the back of his hand on the table at extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is proceeding to the back of the hand, then let the position of his hand be inwardly on the table, that is, let the inner part of his hand be placed on the table so that the hand of the doctor may fall upon the prominence of the joint.
Therefore if it returns immediately, that is good; and if not, then bind it with a plaster soothing the swelling and send him away, and do not touch it again.
For if he does not tolerate it, and you are unable to effect a reduction of it after days have passed, nevertheless the joint remains according to its crookedness; and nothing harms the infirm except that his hand is softened and he cannot grasp anything; then know that the nerves are cut or rubbed.
Therefore there is no remedy in this except to cauterize it near its joint. And perhaps that does not effect anything.
When therefore Almahassem does not return, then put upon it a plaster which we have described. Then let it be bound and sent away for five days; afterwards let it be loosened and sent away, and let the hand be exercised.
But if its motion is deprived and something weighty happens to it; then soften it with warm water and frequent friction until it is softened.
On the Treatment of Dislocations of the Fingers.
When a finger is dislocated from it, to any part, or from it, to the back of the palm or its belly; then extend the finger and press the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
Then support the head of the finger, and suspend it toward the part to which it is dislocated and send it away for two days.
Then suspend it and extend it until its straightness is equal in its own day.
Therefore, when it is night, bind it according to the narration itself; and do not cease to loosen it during the day; and exercise it with motion; and bind it at night.
Do that for several days until it is tightened.
And do the same with it if it dislocates towards the belly of the hand; and bind it to the part itself, and perform your first operation on it until it is healed.
And do the same with it when it dislocates to the other parts.
On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Dorsal Vertebra.
When it happens to someone that the dorsal vertebra or the vertebrae of the neck are completely dislocated, or many vertebrae are removed from their places, then there is no cure in it, because death hastens the infirm person.
And the sign of it is that the excretion of the infirm person comes forth without volition, and he cannot hold it; and very often some of his limbs are softened from it, or both legs of his, or both arms of his, or one of them; or one vertebra is removed from its place.
Very often it is removed, because very often the removal of them happens in four parts.
That which is therefore removed to the rear is called a Kyphosis.
The treatment of it, however, is that you consider then if the kyphosis happens from childhood; then there is no cure in it, nor any healing at all from it.
But as for that which happens from a fall, or a blow, or similar things like them, the ancients have already said modes of treatment in lengthy speech. Of which most does not return with profit.
I, however, have already shortened it from that which excuses a little from a great deal of it because of my intention's proximity to it; and by my exposition in which I exposed it and formed its instrument in a different way from the one in which they showed it and exposed it.
Therefore I say that in a hunchback which occurs from the front part, there is neither skill nor healing from it.
And similarly in that which happens on both sides also.
And it is not cured from them, except that which occurs in the back properly, with that which I relate: and it is, that the weak one be extended onto his face above a level platform near the wall; and let straw matting be spread underneath him so that his chest is not injured.
Then let a straight piece of wood be placed fixed into a hole in the ground, at the extremity of the platform, around his head; and another piece of wood around his feet at the other extremity of the platform; and let an assistant hold the wood, and let it not be fixed into a hole. And let another assistant hold the other one.
Then let a soft, strong bandage be wrapped over the head of the weak one, and under his armpits; and extend the end of the bandage to the wood which is by his head, and bind it there.
Then let another bandage be tightened above his hips, and above his knees, and at his heels. Then bring together all the bandages and bind them to the other wood which is by his feet.
Then let each assistant extend the bandage to the wood, and let the two pieces of wood not be removed from their places in which they are fixed; however, let them not be fastened, as we have said.
And the doctor shall place his hands upon the spine with strength until it returns; or he shall place them upon a board. Then he attaches his feet to the board until it returns.
But if it does not return through this treatment, then take a board whose length is approximately three cubits. And dig in the wall of which we said that it is near the weak one, a place into which the end of the board may enter. Then place the middle of the board on the Spondilem. And let the physician put his feet on the other extremity. And let him tighten it well, until the Spondilem is constricted and returns to its place.
Then if you wish, operate with a lathe which is enclosed with your hand; and it is, that you fix at the ground by the head of the sick man on the last step two pieces of wood, whose length is one arm's length: and by his head on the last step two pieces of wood.
And let the length which is between all wood be one palm; and now a hole has been made in every place, in which the lathe runs; and let all the wood be fastened firmly in the ground so that it does not move at all.
And insert a round piece of wood; and it is a lathe in which the ligature revolves in two holes of two pieces of wood.
And at its extremity there is a hole, in which wood is fastened, whose length is one palm with what revolves; and similarly in the two other pieces of wood.
Then tighten the ligatures which you have tied in the chest of the sick man with the lathe which is by his head; and the ligatures which you have tied in his legs with the lathe which is by his feet.
Then let a servant stand by each lathe who twists his hand with licorice with which the lathe revolves; and the physician adjusts the Spondilem according to what we have said.
This is the form of the lathe, which follows.
Then after the Spondilem returns and the place is equal, it is necessary that you put a drying plaster with egg white. Then a cotton swab. Afterwards place on the plaster a splint from a board, whose width is three fingers or thereabouts. And its length is such a quantity that it takes hold of the place of the Gibbosity and above the part of the Spondilem which is sound.
Then it is tied with the ligature which we have said. And let the weak one use delicate nourishment until he is healed.
But if some eminence should remain in the place at the end of healing: then it is necessary that medicines be administered which soften and soothe, with the application of a plaster as we have described for a long time. And now a plate of lead is applied to that area.
And sometimes an eminence occurs in the last vertebra of the back: and it is thought to be a dislocation, and that is the bone which already protrudes. Therefore it is not necessary to presume this with this medicine: for it may perchance cause death.
On the treatment of a dislocated jaw.
Know that dislocations of the jaw and shoulder do not occur unless it is a dislocation only: nor does what happens to other joints from slight removal and concavity happen to them.
And indeed the joint of the jaw dislocates according to four parts. Which is because it dislocates forward and backward.
And indeed it most often dislocates inward: and rarely dislocates forward and backward.
And the treatment of its dislocation inward is: because when you join the leg of a healthy person with the unhealthy one it is longer: and the knee of the unhealthy one is more prominent than that of the healthy one, and he cannot bend his foot at the groin: and there is a place following the groin inflamed with a warm poultice, because the head of the femur has already arrived there.
And the sign of him to whom a dislocation outward occurs is that these are accidents contrary to those accidents.
And the sign of him to whom a dislocation forward occurs is because he extends the healthy leg according to complement: however he cannot bend it without pain which is in the knee: and if he attempts to walk, he cannot go beyond that forward: and his urine is retained, and his groin becomes inflamed, and when walking there is pressure on his heel.
The sign of one to whom dislocation has occurred backwards is that his knee does not extend, nor can he bend it forward before bending his groin; and his leg is also shorter than the other; and his groin is softened, and the head of his femur is at the place of the ilium.
The reduction of this kind of dislocation is, however, that you consider then if the dislocation is old, which has already grown old with him having it. Then if you administer its reduction and it remains according to its own disposition, then there is no cure at all in it. Therefore, it must not be entirely presumed upon him.
But in him whose dislocation is recent, and is of one of the four species of dislocation, then hasten to this so that you wish for the juncture, and extend it to the insides and outsides, and move it right and left: perhaps it will return, and not need any other cure.
But if it does not return in this way, then it is necessary that you prepare a strong attendant, and he extends his leg from the lower part: either with his hands or with a ligament which is tied above his leg above the knee: and another attendant extends his hand from above so that he inserts his hands under his malleoli. Then let him tie with a soft ligament above the root of the femur, and hold the end of the other ligament.
And let its extension be either from the front part of the groin to the fork part, or from the back to the dorsal part.
And let the extension of them all be together, until the weak man is raised with his body from the earth, and remains hanging.
And this kind of extension is a common kind of the four kinds.
If therefore the dislocation returns with what we said it is good; and if not then it is necessary for every kind that which I shall say about its own proper cure.
In reducing it when the dislocation is inward, it is necessary for the weak side to be laid upon its own sound side. Then let him place a bandage over the root of the thigh, on that which is between the head of the thigh and the place which is under the groin. Then extend the bandage upward from the groin to the higher part of the body, to the part of the collar bone.
Then let another attendant take hold of his strong arms and reduce the thick place of the weak thigh, and extend it outward with a vehement extension. Now it will return to its place.
And this kind is easier than the other kinds of treatments by which this limb is reduced.
But if it is excused over you and does not obey you to enter with this kind of treatment altogether, then it is necessary for the two feet of the weak one to be bound together with a strong, soft bandage, over the two heels and over the two knees: and let the length of each be of the quantity of four fingers from its companion, and let the weak leg be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
Then let the weak one be suspended over the head of a beam which is in the house, and let its length from the ground be the quantity of two arm spans.
Then order a strong young man to brace the head of the thigh and let another young man be suspended with the weak one: and let the other young man urge it forward bracing the thigh with strength, for the joint will return to its place with speed.
But in reducing it when the dislocation is outward, it is necessary for the weak one to lie upon a bench, according as we have narrated in treating a hunchback. And let a bandage be tied over its leg, properly the weak one, and over its chest.
Then let two pieces of wood be placed, one at its feet and the other at its head. Then a piece of wood is placed in the middle of the footstool, fixed well; upon which wet cloths are wrapped so as not to injure the sick man; and let the wood be between his thighs so that he is not drawn downwards during extension.
Then let every attendant extend to his own part, and the doctor equalize the reduction with his hand.
If therefore it yields to reversion, it will be good.
And if not, place the board upon it and press it equally as we said in the humpbacked condition. However, it is necessary that the sick man lies on his sound side.
And when the dislocation is forward, then it is necessary that the leg of the sick man be extended quickly; and this according to the same account is upon the footstool: and let the doctor place the palm of his right hand upon the groin of the sick man. Then he shall constrict him with his other hand, and with that constriction place him extended downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is backward: then it is not necessary that the sick man be extended downwards, and he shall be raised up above the ground; rather he ought to be placed upon something hard as it ought to be done also when his elbow is dislocated outwards according to what we said about his reclining upon two elbows; and it is upon his face, and the ligaments are extended according to what we said recently.
And it is necessary that compression be administered with a board also upon the place to which the joint goes forth, when reduction is completed as it ought to be.
And the sign of its return is not hidden from you; and it is that you extend the two legs of the sick man; and when you see them equal, and the sick man draws up his leg, and extends it without excuse: then you shall know that the limb has now returned as it ought to be; then join the two thighs together, and apply a plaster, and bind with an imemati, that is, a bandage, so that the elbow does not move towards any part; and let the sick man remain quiet for three days or four.
Then loosen the ligature and bandage, and compare the leg with the other. Then if you see them equal in condition, then you will know that the dislocation is now firm; therefore dismiss the weak one to walking.
And if you see anything of softening: then return, and bandage that, and bind it according to your first binding; and dismiss it also for three days.
Then loosen it and make it delay in walking on both for several days, until it is well strengthened.
Concerning the dislocation of the knee.
The knee is dislocated according to three modes. It is dislocated outward, inward, and downward, that is, backward.
And it is not dislocated forward.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you command the weak one to apply his leg to his hip. But if it does not adhere with the hip, then you will know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all modes of its dislocation is that you make the weak one sit straight so that now he extends his leg if he can upon it and adheres your back to his face; and place his foot between your feet.
Then make his knee adhere with your palms, and place them straight between your fingers above his knee. Then apply with your palm the two sides of his knee with force. And another attendant extends his foot until the knee returns to its place.
And the sign of restoration is that the leg adheres with the hip easily, not laboriously.
Then bandage it and make the leg adhere with the hip. Then bind it together with a splint for three days or four. Then loosen them.
And let him not walk for several days until he is healed.
But if he refuses reduction to you, then administer strong extension with ligaments, of which mention was made previously in the treatment of a sprain, until it returns.
Concerning the treatment of dislocation of the heel.
The heel is sometimes removed with slight displacement and sometimes dislocated according to its complement. And its dislocation occurs either inward or outward.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the heel swollen, protruding to the side to which it is dislocated.
But the treatment of its removal is easy reduction, and it is that it be extended with ease with the hands, and equalized until it returns.
But in the treatment of it when it is dislocated according to its complement, it is necessary that you make the sick person sit straight, and let a strong attendant hold him firmly from behind on the middle part of his back.
Then take hold with your right hand of his foot from its upper part, and with your left hand from the lower part of his foot near the ankle.
Then draw the foot toward you with your right hand. Then push with your left hand twice.
Then extend with your left and push the chest of the foot with your right toward the leg without effort.
Do that twice as we have described.
Then push the chest of the foot toward the leg in the third time, and you draw the ankle.
If therefore it returns in one or two times according to this method, and you see the foot equalized, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation upon him for it will return.
But if reduction is prevented from you with what we have described, then make the sick person lie on his back on the ground, and fix a wedge firmly in the earth so that it falls between his thighs; and you now have wrapped a cloth over him so as not to injure the sick person.
Then let the assistant take hold of his thigh; afterwards, let another assistant extend the foot, either with his hands or with a bandage that he ties around the neck of the foot. Then let every assistant extend himself against the extension of his companion; and let a bolster stand between the two thighs of the sick man, holding him so that his body is not drawn downwards during the extension.
Then let the physician equalize the dislocation with his hands, and let another assistant hold the sound leg downwards. For the dislocation returns with speed.
Therefore when the dislocation returns and its restoration is made clear to you: then apply a plaster and wad, and bind it firmly with bandages, and tie the foot with a bandage to the leg.
And it is necessary that you beware or are afraid of the nerves which are above the heel behind, so that the bandage is not tight upon them and injures them.
Then dismiss him for two days or three. And if the bandage becomes loosened, tighten it; then untie it on the third or fourth day; and forbid the sick man from walking for forty days. But if he should attempt to walk before that time, there is no safety lest the dislocation occur upon him again and be corrupted, and it will not receive a cure afterwards.
But if a hot abscess should happen to him: then it is necessary that you administer to him in its sedation what our previous narration has stated elsewhere for treatment, and an application, until it is removed.
Concerning the dislocation of the toes, and their cure.
It is necessary that what is dislocated from them be equalized with a little extension without labor; and indeed this is not difficult, but rather easy.
But if the dislocation is in some of the knots on the back of the foot: then it is necessary that the sick man makes his foot sit upon a place equal to the earth, or upon a board; and he stands as though walking.
Then you stand, and put your foot on that which protrudes from those joints. Then press it with your foot with strength, until it returns, and you see it now level, and no prominence appears in its place.
Then place under the belly of his foot a plank which takes the whole foot, which has two heads. Then bind it with a decent binding for three days. Then unbind it, and make him rest from walking for many days, until it is bound and secured from displacement.
Concerning the kinds of dislocations with wound or fracture.
When something of that kind happens, and you attempt its cure and restoration, very often death follows; and therefore it is not necessary that one presume upon the cure of such a thing unless he is prudent in the art from long practice, merciful, pious, slow, neither bold nor presumptuous; and that he use in the beginning medicines which allay only hot abscesses: and let him send the sick man to divine judgment. Unless you see or hope for salvation from destruction with the mildness of the illness, and in which something of hope appears. Therefore attempt its reduction immediately at the beginning, before a hot abscess occurs.
And if therefore the limb returns as we wish, then administer a regimen which allays the abscess; and care for the wound with that which suits it from drying ointments.
But if the dislocation is with a fracture and separate chips occur in the bone, then attempt their removal and do in it what we said in simple illnesses from that which preceded in their places.
And be careful according to your strength, and guard yourself from entering the way of fear; according to my previous preaching to you.
For that is better for you with your Creator, and more enduring for your glory, and more saving for your body among them in your time.
