After I completed for you, O sons, this book, which is the last of medical science with its completion, and I reached the end in it from its expositions and its own statements, it seemed to me fitting to complete it for you with this Treatise which is a part of operation, that is, surgery by hand.
Since operation by hand is laid low in our region and time completely lost, until perhaps the knowledge of it perished, and its trace was cut off, and there remained from it nothing except small descriptions in old books, which hands altered, and error and hesitation happened to them until its intentions were closed and its force extended: It seemed fitting to me to revive it with the ordering of this Treatise on it according to the way of exposition, declaration, and abbreviation; and to come with forms of instruments of cautery and the rest of the tools for the work; with what is done by addition from declarations and from the celerity of that which is necessary.
The reason why a good craftsman of it with his hand is not found in our time is: because the art of medicine is long, and it is necessary for its author to practice before that in the science of anatomy, as Galen narrated, until he knows the functions of the members, and their forms, and their conjunction and separation, and has knowledge of the bones, nerves, and muscles, and their number, and their emergence, and veins pulsating and quiet, and the places of their exit.
And on account of that Hippocrates said, that a name with a name is much, and with work is little, and especially in the art of the hand.
We, however, already said about that at the beginning of this book.
Since he who is not knowing what we said about anatomy, is not purged, but rather falls into error by which men are killed: just as I saw many of those who are formed from this science and boast themselves about it without knowledge, and without experiment.
This happened because I saw a stupid doctor cut open a scrofulous abscess on a woman's neck and he cut some arteries in her neck: therefore the woman's blood flowed until she fell dead between his hands.
And I saw another doctor who presumed to extract a stone from a man who had advanced in age and the stone was large. He therefore reached him and extracted it with a piece of bladder. Therefore the man died on the third day.
And I myself had already been called to extract it and I saw from the size of the stone and the condition of the sick man that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who was receiving a fee from a Duke of our land for medicine and it happened that a black eunuch who was with him suffered a fracture in his leg near his heel and the doctor rushed with his ignorance and bound the fracture over the wound with bandages and strong bindings and did not allow the wound to breathe.
Then he released him according to his wishes. Afterward he dismissed him after several days and ordered him not to loosen the bandage and it remained so until his leg and foot became abscessed and it came to destruction.
I was therefore called to him and I hurried to loosen the bandage and tranquility followed and he was freed from his pains.
However, the corruption had already been confirmed in the limb and I could not restrain it.
Therefore the corruption ceased to spread in the limb until it died.
And I saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous abscess and it became ulcerated afterward until its malice was magnified with its master.
This is because when cancer is pure from melancholic humor then it should not be reached with iron at all unless it is in a limb that can tolerate it so that its whole mass can be cut off.
And for that reason, O sons, it is necessary for you to know that an operation with the hand is divided into two divisions: namely, operation which is associated with safety; and operation, with which there is danger in many dispositions.
And I have already aroused in every place of this book, in which comes an operation, in which there is terror and fear.
Therefore it is necessary for you to beware of that, and to diminish it so that fools do not find a way to speak and dishonor.
Therefore receive measure with solicitude and protection, and your sick with ease and firmness, and use the better way leading by the grace of God to salvation and praiseworthy succession: and dismiss terrible illnesses of difficult healing: and lift up your souls from that which makes you fear so that hesitation may enter upon you in your faith and well-being.
For it is more lasting for your glory, and more sublime in this world, and finally to your quantities.
For Galen has already said in some of his admonishments. Do not treat a bad illness, lest you be named among bad doctors.
Now this Treatise has been divided according to three Chapters.
Chapter One.
On cautery with fire and cautery with sharp medicine, chaptered and ordered from head to foot, and forms of instruments and tools for cautery; and everything that is necessary in the operation.
Chapter Two.
On incision and perforation, phlebotomy and venesection, and wounds; and the extraction of arrows, and things similar to it; and all chaptered, ordered according to forms of instruments.
Chapter Three.
On restoration and dislocation, and the treatment of torsion, and things similar to it; chaptered, ordered from head to foot, and according to forms of instruments.
But before I recall the operations performed with it, it is necessary to say what are its qualities of cauteries and their harms; and in what complexion they should be exhibited.
I say therefore that speech concerning the quality of cautery's benefit and its harm is a lengthy and subtle science, and a hidden secret.
Indeed, many wise men have spoken on this subject and disagreed; and it suffices for me a little from their speeches, fearing prolixity.
Therefore I say that cautery generally confers benefit to every complexion which has matter and lacks matter, except for two complexions: a hot complexion without matter, and a dry complexion without matter.
However, in the hot and dry complexion with matter they disagreed. For some said that cautery is beneficial in it. Others said the opposite of that, namely that cautery is not suitable in a disease which arises from heat and dryness; because the nature of fire is heat; and it is inconvenient for something hot and dry to heal a disease that is hot and dry.
And he who said the opposite of that said that cautery brings benefit to every hot and dry disease which occurs in the bodies of men; because when you compare the body of man and its humors to the complexion of fire, you find the body of man cold.
And I indeed say through his speech because experience has now revealed that to me many times.
However, it is not necessary for one to come upon this unless he has already been proven and practiced in the ultimate exercise of cautery and has recognized the diversity of human complexions and the disposition of diseases within themselves and their causes and accidents, and the space of time of these things.
But there is no fear for you from the other temperaments; and especially in cold and humid illnesses. For all physicians have now agreed upon them, and they did not disagree on healing them with cautery.
And know, sons, that from the secret of healing by cautery with fire, and its goodness over cautery with burning medicine, is because fire is simple, whose action does not reach except to the member which you are cauterizing, and it does not harm another joined member with it, except for slight harm.
But the action of burning medicine reaches that which is extended from the members and perhaps causes a difficulty in healing to occur in the member, and perhaps it kills it.
But fire, on account of its subtlety and goodness of its substance, does not do that unless it overflows.
Indeed it has now become clear to us through experiment, because of the length of service and study with the art, and our standing upon the truth of things; and on account of that I excuse myself from the length of speech.
And if it were not allowed to this book of mine, I would bring to you the secret hidden in fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies by its expulsion, by which it expels illnesses with philosophical speech demonstrative, which would be fitting for your minds.
And know, sons, that they themselves disagree on the time in which it is fitting to perform cautery, and they put forward a better time for truth.
And I say that cautery is fitting in all time because the harm which happens because of time is submerged in the healing which is attracted with cautery. And especially if the cautery is for pains from necessary pains, strong ones, urgent ones, which do not tolerate delay; because it is feared from them that a greater evil may happen than a slight harm entering because of time.
And let it not enter your minds, O sons, that which the common and foolish physicians do not believe, namely that for that illness which is healed by cautery, there is not always a return; and they put this as a consequence, but the matter is not as they think; because cautery is nothing but a medicine in its place, which alters the complexion and dries up the humors which are the causes why pains occur.
However, cautery surpasses medicine in the speed of its healing, and the power of its operation, and the intensity of its dominion; and it is possible that the illness may return at some hour according to the complexion of the sick person, and the location of his illness, and its power; and what is prepared in his body from the aggregation of superfluities in it; and what comes to him in its acquisition from foods, and similar causes, unless the illness arises in which cautery is administered.
An illness subtle in a limb with few superfluities and humors, such as cautery of a tooth, on account of pain and similar things to it, for it is possible that the pain will not return there. But this happens rarely.
But truly the common saying that cautery is the last resort of medicine is a right statement: not according to what they intend in it; for they believe that there is no cure which can compare with medicine nor with any other after the cautery has been performed.
The matter is the opposite of that, and the intent in which cautery is said to be the last resort of medicine is not, except when we administer modes of treatment in some illnesses, and those medicines do not avail; then we administer cautery at the end of the matter, and it avails; then it falls that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and many foolish physicians understand.
The ancients said that a cautery with gold is better than a cautery with iron; and they did not say this except on account of the equality of gold, and the subtlety of its substance; and they said that it does not produce pus at the site of the cautery. But that is not absolutely true; for I have already proven it, and found that it does not do that in some bodies without others.
And a cautery with it is good, and better than with iron, as they said. However, when you ignite a cautery in fire made of gold, it is not shown to you, when ignited according to the quantity which you wish, because of the redness of the gold; and when cold quickly approaches it, and if you add fire on top of it, it melts in the fire, and turns into sheets.
Therefore, the craftsman falls from it into occupation; and because of that, a cautery with iron is made among us faster and closer, from straightforwardness to operation.
And I myself have now arranged this chapter on the cautery according to chapters; and I have arranged them from the head down to the feet, so that it may relieve one seeking that which he wants from it.
Chapter II.
This cauterization pertains to the dominion of humidity and coldness over the brain; which are two causes of headache, and a multitude of flows of humors from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and a multitude of sleep, and toothache, and throat pain; and universally all sickness, which happens from coldness, such as paralysis, and headache, epilepsy, and apoplexy, and similar illnesses to those.
The manner of cauterization is that you order the sick person: to evacuate in the first place with cleansing medicine three nights, or four, according to what requires the strength of the infirm person, and his age, and his habit.
Then order him to shave his head with a razor. Then make him sit between your hands on a stool, so that he has already placed his hands on his chest.
Then place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes. Wherever therefore your middle finger arrives, mark that place with a cautery.
Then with an olive-wood cautery: which has this shape.
Then place it on the spot marked with the cautery, descending in such a way that your hand constricts gradually, and you revolve it. Then lift your hand quickly and look at the place.
And if you see that a quantity equal to the head of an alky or a quantity equal to rue has already been exposed from the bone, then lift your hand. And if not, repeat your hand with the iron itself, or with another from it if it becomes cold: until the bones which I told you are seen.
Then take some salt and dissolve it in water, and soak the cotton wool in it, and place it on the spot; and leave it for three days.
Then place cotton wool soaked in butter on top of it, and leave it on the spot until the burn is destroyed. Then care for it with tetrapharmakon ointment until it is healed.
It has been said that the more a wound remains open, the more pus it emits: therefore it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them have said that the skin should be cauterized up to the bone, and the cautery should be held until something of the thickness of a bone is charred.
Then after that which has been charred is scraped off from the bone, then it is cared for.
And others say that it is necessary with the cautery to reach the very end until it imprints a template on the bone so that the bone falls away, which is done like the shape of a kirate: or an instrument which women put in infused with a small alphabet; and they believe that vapors from the head are exhaled from this place and the wound is left open for a long time.
Then it should be cared for until it is consolidated.
But these two kinds of cautery do not seem to me to be anything other than according to the way of fear in certain men.
And to dismiss him, is better with his health according to me.
For the head is weakened from the solution of its natural continuity, as we have testified in other members; and especially when the head of a weak, feeble person is; and the first kind of cautery is indeed safer and better for me, and I use it; therefore operate with it safely.
Chapter III.
When a chronic pain occurs in the whole head and it is prolonged in a weak person, and they use leeches, poultices, head-purgatives, oils, and emplasters. And especially if it has already been cauterized with one cautery, which we have described, and those things do not bring him any relief, then consider. For if the head of a weak person is strong by nature and is not feeble, and it encounters severe cold, then cauterize with another cautery under that one a little. Then cauterize it over the whole horn of its head with a cautery, so that it does not pass through the skin, and uncover from the bone a quantity, as we have described. And cauterize it with one cautery on the back of its head, in the place which is called "vas"; and this place is where the wind is placed; elevate your hand in this, and do not uncover the bone. For the weak person finds because of that severe pain, and different from the pain of all other head cauteries.
And I say this cautery in its place; and it is necessary that it be a cautery with which the horns of the head are cauterized, and the back of the head with a more subtle cautery, with which the middle of the head is cauterized.
Chapter IV.
When pain and swelling occur in a part of the head, or the pain extends to the eye, and the head is purged with purifying medicines, and the remaining treatment, which I mentioned in the divisions of diseases, is administered, and it does not fully resolve; then cauterization is appropriate in this case according to two methods: either cauterization with a sharp, burning medicine; or with iron.
Cauterization with a sharp, burning medicine is done as follows: take one clove of garlic and peel it, and cut off its ends from both sides. Then split the place of pain at a time when bloodletting is broad, until a place under the skin is made where the tooth is taken.
Therefore insert it just under the skin until it is concealed; then bind it above with a constriction appropriate for a poultice, and leave it for fifteen hours; then loosen it and remove the garlic; and let it rest for two or three days; afterwards apply a swab dipped in butter over it until the place forms pus; then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish to do so with certain burning medicines, which I wrote in the twelfth treatise, On Burning Medicines.
Cauterization of it with iron is done as follows. Heat the cautery, whose shape is this.
And it is called a cautery iron because the shape of its head is like the shape of a key, which has some curvature and in the middle of it there is a small prominence.
Then place it upon the location and hold your hand steady; and turn the iron gradually with speed; and the amount that is cauterized should be half of the thickness of the skin. And raise your hand so that the artery which is below is not injured and bleeding may occur.
Then soak a compress in salt water and place it on the spot and leave it for three days; then place the compress with butter; afterwards treat with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize this hemi cranium with the second point of the cautery. And beware of cutting an artery in this hemi cranium, not an old one properly.
Concerning the method of cauterizing an old hemi cranium.
When you treat a hemi cranium with what we said from the previous treatment and what we said in the divisions of diseases and the treatment does not work; and you see from the illness that it is not sufficient for it what we said from the first cautery with medicine, or with cautery with fire, then it is necessary that you ignite the knife cautery until it becomes white after you mark a line on the spot of pain whose length is half a finger, or so; and place your hand with one finger, and press it until you strike the artery and reach up to the mouth.
However it is necessary for you to be careful of the continuation of the mandible, which moves during chewing, lest its side or the nerve that moves it be injured, from which a spasm may occur.
And be watchful and careful about the flow of blood from the artery which has been cut. For in its cutting off there is fear, and especially for him who does not know that which he is doing, and is neither studious nor experienced; and he abandons the operation with it at first.
And I will come with a recollection of the regimen of the flow of blood occurring from an artery according to its manner, and in its place in this book.
If you see from the illness that this cautery is not sufficient for it, and you see the body of the weak person enduring the cautery in the middle of the head, as we have described, care for the wound until it heals.
And if you wish, apply the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on the extraction of an artery with a cautery having two knives. For this cauterization is better and more effective.
On the manner of cauterizing for ear pain.
When pain occurs in the ear from cold and is treated with solutions and the remaining treatment as we have mentioned in the division, and the pain is not removed, then apply a cautery by fire. And this is what is called a Point, its shape is as follows.
Then points with it after its ignition are made in a circle around the entire ear, as it revolves; or in a circle around both, if there is pain in both at the same time. And distance yourself with the cautery from the root of the ear a little, after you have marked the places with an ointment; and let the quantity of the cautery be ten punctures in each ear, and like that.
Then care for the places until they heal.
On the manner of cauterizing for a sprain.
Chapter Seven.
A sprain that is treated with cautery is only of the types that occur from phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
And avoid cautery for types that occur from dryness and nerve spasm.
When you treat this type of sprain with herbs, poultices, and gargles, and your treatment does not take effect, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, the second a little below its temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery opposite the weak part. For softening does not happen unless in the part which appears healthy.
And the form of cauterization is, to cauterize it with the cautery itself in a straight line from the upper extremity of the ear below the horn of the head a little; and at another time: whose length is according to the length of the thumb. And place your hand with the cautery until a quantity of half the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a kind from the one with a blade, whose form was mentioned before; however it is not thinner by a little, as you see; and it should be that the knife in it has unnecessary thickness a little.
Then care for the places, with what preceded, until they are healed.
On the manner of cauterizing in old apoplexy.
When apoplexy becomes old, and you care for it with what we said, and your medication does not help, and the weak person does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries above all the horn of his head, and with a cautery in the middle of the head, as we said, and with a cautery on the back of the head, according to what preceded; and let the manner of the cautery be according to what preceded.
Also cauterize with a cautery above the mouth of the stomach: and it is more final.
Then care for it, with what preceded.
Chapter Nine.
It is necessary that first the weak person be given a large quantity of hyssop and pills that purify the brain.
Then shave the head of the weak person completely and place on the back of his head a plaster of sycamore as described in the treatise on plasters; and apply it several times.
Indeed, this is the method of cautery; and do that in the same order as I said there.
Therefore if it heals thereby, it is good. If not, then do three cauteries on the back of his head, which descend from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the eye; and put the breadth of a finger between each cautery.
Then care for the cautery, as with the one that preceded it.
But if you wish an addition, and he is able to tolerate it; then do a cautery for him in the middle. And if you wish an addition, then cauterize him above the two horns.
Then care for him until he is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form that was mentioned previously.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in paralysis and softening.
Chapter Ten.
It is necessary that you proceed with the purification of the head with hyssop and with what we have said.
Then shave the head of the sick person; afterwards cauterize him with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with a cautery above each horn of the head, and with a cautery above the back of it, and with three above the vertebrae of the neck.
But if you are dealing with illness in softening of the body with more than those, and he is able to tolerate it, and the illness is strong; then cautery him with four cauteries above the vertebrae of the back, and the last one with a cautery until most of it is burned from the skin, and raise your hand. Then care for him until he is healed; and thus let the cautery be olive-shaped.
Concerning the method of cauterying in epilepsy.
An epileptic is not cauterized unless his epilepsy is from phlegm.
Therefore it is necessary that you cleanse his brain first of all with vinegar, and with the remaining treatment which we mentioned in the division: when he is strong, or when he can bear taking medicines.
But if he is a child who cannot bear medicines, then a gargle and cleaning mastications for the brain are given before it, for many days with good food.
Then shave his head, and afterwards cauterize it with one cautery in the middle of the head, according to what preceded in the manner; and with another cautery on the back of his head, and with a cautery over all the horn of his head. But if the sick person is strong and can bear it, then cauterize him with the cauteries which I mentioned in the one having paralysis, and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back; and let the cautery be olive-oil according to the manner which preceded.
But if the sick person is a child then put a delicate cautery according to this manner.
Concerning the Manner of Cauterizing in Melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize him with the cauteries which we mentioned in the one having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is a superfluity tending towards melancholy and the body of the sick person is damp, then give him a drink which will cleanse his brain, according to what preceded in the division; then shave the head of the sick person, and afterwards make a well-shaped turband out of linen, like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of his head; and the sick person sitting straight should be held on all sides.
Then present a liniment. And it is more fitting to be made from old butter. And heat it over a fire with a tempered heat, which the finger can bear when introduced into it. Then evacuate it in the middle of his head in a circle, and let it alone until it becomes cold.
Do that to the weak one once a week, with the rest of his good regimen, until he is healed.
Or if you wish, cauterize it by making many small punctures on it, except where you hold it with the cautery: let there be a smell.
For this kind of cautery moistens the brain with quality.
Then put a swab soaked in butter or chicken fat on top of it.
On the manner of cauterizing descending to the eye in water.
Chapter Thirteen.
When the beginning of water in the eye is declared to you by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and make the weak one drink, with that which cleanses his head.
And keep him from all moistures, and have him sit in a bath, fasting for several days.
Then instruct him to shave his head, and cauterize it in the middle of his own head. Then cauterize it above the two temples with two cauteries, if there is a beginning of the descent of water in both eyes at the same time; or from one side, if there is a beginning of water in one eye; and cut off with the cautery all the veins and arteries which are under the skin; and let the cautery be long in width above the temples; and beware of the flow of blood.
For if you see anything from it, then cut it off immediately with whatever medicine is possible; and I will come with the wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and the cutting off of them and caution from the flow of blood.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck, under the two bones, with two cauteries lastly produced.
On the manner of cauterizing old tears.
When tears of the eyes are old, persistent, and are upon the veins and arteries which are on the outer surface of the head, it is verified that this is from cold, phlegmatic superfluities; then cauterize with the same cautery as I have described in the beginning of descending water, with a cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries upon two temples, and two cauteries on the neck under two bones. And if it does not yield with addition, then cauterize it on every side cautiously above the eye, upon the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Concerning the method of cauterizing for a foul smell of the nose.
When you treat it with that which we said in the division, and medication does not avail, then hasten and give in a draught three nights of infirmocochias; then shave its head and cauterize it with a medium cautery, with an olive-wood cautery. Then cauterize it with a small cautery, with two cauteries on the two eyebrows a little under the hairs.
And guard against the artery so as not to strike it.
And this is the form of a small cautery.
Concerning the method of cauterizing for relaxation of the eyelid.
When the eyelid of the eye becomes relaxed from illness or moisture, then cauterize the eyelid with one cautery, with a moon-shaped cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize it above the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries on every side; and let them be extended from the two temples; and let the length of the whole cautery be according to the lengths of the eyebrow; and do not finish your hand with the cautery, but rather according to the amount that the third eyelid is burned.
On the way of cauterizing an eyelid when prickly hairs are turned inwards and irritate the eye.
A cautery is of two types: either a cautery with fire or a cautery with a burning medicine.
However, in a fire cautery, advise the patient beforehand to let their hairs grow out, if they are among those who remove them, until they are lengthened and even. But if they sting him at their root, then bind his eyes with a strip so that they do not move until they are born.
Therefore, when they are born and even, then place the patient's head in your lap; then mark on the eyelid of his eyes with wax, a mark that is according to the shape of a myrtle leaf; and let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs.
Then place cotton soaked in albumin or in psyllium mucilage over the eye.
Then with fire a cautery, whose shape is this.
Then cauterize over the shape which you have marked gradually in many times until the surface of the skin which is like the shape of a myrtle leaf, is entirely burned properly.
And the sign of the success of your work is: that if you see the eyelid of the eye already contracting and the hairs rising at the puncture of the eye.
Therefore, raise your hand then, and let him go for three days.
Then place cotton with butter on it until the eschar is eradicated. Then care for him with ointment until he is healed.
And if any hair returns after an hour and the eyelid softens, then repeat the cautery over that place as you did at first.
If, however, the hairs are on the lower eyelid, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural place; and make it even so that the hairs do not prick the eye.
It is as if you should direct the sick person to let the hairs grow out until they are lengthened and even. Make from paper or cloth a shape of a myrtle leaf.
Then take from known soap and from lime not imbibed from each one weight of one ounce or nearly that; then grind them together with good attrition and make it quickly so that it does not become cold. Then from the pan spread it upon the paper which you have made like a myrtle leaf shape and place it upon the eyelid of one or both eyes. And place under the eye a piece of cloth soaked in albuminous fluid; and let the head of the sick person be in your lap.
And place your index finger upon the medicine and press it for a short time. And you will move it whenever the sick person feels the bite of the medicine; because it finds its bite like fire.
While therefore he perseveres in this, that he finds the bite, then let go of the medicine and move it with your finger. When therefore the bite quiets, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And consider then if you see the eyelid being raised as it is raised with fire or incision, it is well; and if not, then repeat upon it from the medicine upon the place where the medicine does not imprint and does not stain until your operation is equal and the eye contracts.
Then place upon it a cloth with butter until the skin burn is eradicated. Then care for it with diaphinicon ointment or another until it heals.
And it is necessary for you during surgery, that you guard with the utmost care, lest anything from the medicine should fall into the eye.
If the eyelid softens after a few days and something from the hairs fights its way into the eye, then repeat the medicine upon that place which softens from the eyelid itself, just as you did at first. Then take care of it until it heals.
And this is the form of a myrtle leaf.
And know that the eyes of men are diversified in size and equality. Therefore let your consideration be according to that, and the way of righteousness is not hidden from him who has a desire concerning this art.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in lacrimal fistula.
When you heal a fistula, as we said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatment does not work: then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method.
Instruct the sick person to put his head in your lap, and let a servant hold his head between his hands in such a way that it does not move or shake with his head.
Then put a cotton swab soaked in egg white or in psyllium mucilage over his eye; then with fire a cautery, whose form is this.
Let it be concave, like the shape of a vulture’s quill pen from one end, with which the cautery is made; and if you wish for it to penetrate all the way to the other end, and if you wish for it to go upward, then try thus.
However this concave shape is better for your purpose.
Then press out the fistula if it is open and extract the pus from it and dry it out; and if it is not open, then open it and extract its pus.
Then place the cautery upon it, which has been heated intensely.
And hold your hand with it a little while by the cautery from the eye, to the side of the nose, so that your hand does not stray, or the weak one is not disturbed: and you place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
So if you reach in the beginning of your cautery up to the mouth, it will be well. And if not: then repeat the cautery once, or twice, if it is necessary with it: and dismiss it for three days.
Then place cotton with butter, and care for it with a drying ointment until it is healed.
And if forty days pass it and it does not heal: then place upon it a sharp corrosive medicine until the mouth is uncovered: and scrape it according to what comes in its chapter.
And there is another method of cautery for fistula, which some first said. Attend to the place of the fistula, and find it: then put a thin camahan into the fissure, that is, a thin cannula, whose shape is this. And pour into it a quantity of a drachma from melted lead, and hold your hand with the cannula in good retention, and do not move the weak one at all so that the melted lead does not run or reach its eye.
And it is necessary that you place cotton infused in albumin, yes, or in water upon the eye of the weak one.
For lead burns the place of the fistula, and heals it with a marvelous healing.
If the fistula is healed with what we said from cautery and care, it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to administer a nostril, and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose, according to what will come in its own place.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in fissures of the lips.
Very often there occur in the lip fissures which are called harelips, and especially in the lips of infants.
Therefore when you treat these fissures, as we said in the division of diseases, and the treatment does not help, then a small heated knife cautery, according to this form.
And let its concavity be according to the subtlety of the knife.
Then place the heated cautery quickly in the fissures themselves until the cautery reaches the depth of the fissures.
Then care for it with cerate until it heals.
On the manner of cauterizing a fistula of the mouth.
When an abscess occurs in the root of the gum, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth: then it makes pus and bursts: afterwards it becomes chronic and discharges pus and a fistula forms: then you treat it and the treatment does not help, then it is necessary to apply a heated cautery according to the size which will fit into the fistula. Then insert the heated iron into the opening of the fistula and hold your hand until the heated iron reaches its depth and end: do this once or twice.
Then care for it afterwards with what we said about care until it is healed.
If therefore the discharge is cut off and it heals, it will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupt bone according to what will come in its chapter.
On the manner of cauterizing the gums and softened teeth.
When the gum softens because of moisture and the teeth are loosened and you treat it with medication and it does not help: then place the head of the weak person in your lap.
Then a cautery by fire, whose form will come after this, so that you put the Cannula over the tooth; and insert into it the ignited Cautery quickly: and hold your hand for a short time, until the weak one feels the heat of the fire has now reached the root of the tooth.
Then raise your hand; then repeat the Cautery several times, according as you wish.
Then let the weak one fill his mouth with salt water, and hold it for one hour; and spit it out.
For the tooth moved is made firm, and the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupted moisture is dried.
Concerning the way of cauterizing in Toothache.
When the pain of a tooth is because of coldness, or there is cold itself in it, or a worm, and treatment with medicines does not help; then the Cautery is upon it according to two ways: either Cautery with butter; or cautery with fire.
But the Cautery of it with butter is, so that you take vaccinated butter, and boil it in an iron spoon, or in a crucible. Then take cotton, and wrap it over the end of the tentacle. Then dip it into the boiling butter; and put it on the painful tooth quickly, and hold it until it cools; then repeat it several times, until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, dip wool, or cotton in cold butter, and put it on the aching tooth; and put ignited iron on top of it, until the fire reaches the depth of the cavity of the tooth.
But cautery with fire is, so that you apply to a cannula of air, or a cannula of iron. And let there be something of thickness in its body, so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the weak one.
Then apply a cautery iron, the shape of which will be shown; and place it upon that tooth; and hold your hand there until the cautery iron cools.
Repeat this several times, for the pain will be removed, either on the same day or another day.
And it is necessary that after the impression of the cautery iron, the sick person should fill his mouth with good butter and hold it for one hour; then spit it out.
And this is the shape of the cautery iron.
Cauterize with whichever extremity you wish, as is possible; and this is the shape of the cannula.
On the method of cauterizing fistulas.
When fistulas are from phlegm and cold humors, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, and you wish to hasten their digestion; then apply a concave cautery iron, the shape of which is this.
Having two open extremities so that the smoke may escape from the cautery iron at one extremity; and place it ignited upon the abscess once, and a second time if needed, until it reaches the depth of the abscess.
But if the abscess is small, then place the cautery iron according to the size of the abscess.
Then leave it for three days, and place a poultice soaked in butter upon it until what was burned by the fire is removed.
Then treat it with tooth ointment until the shape of the cannula is healed.
On the method of cauterizing hoarseness of voice and constriction of breathing.
When humors overcome the bronchial tubes, and especially when this is accompanied by coldness of complexion, then it is necessary that the sick person first be evacuated with dissolving medicines.
Then cauterize it at night near the root of the throat in a depressed place, and beware that you do not reach the throat with the cautery, nor the skin except for a little bit of it.
Then cauterize it with another cautery at the junction of the neck on the last vertebra, ending it. And let the cautery be small according to the previous way.
Then treat it with what precedes until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in illnesses of the lung and cough.
When a cough and lung ailment are from cold humors, and the weak person does not have a fever nor phthisis, and the ailment is old: then cauterize him with two cauteries above the collarbone in depressed, smooth, empty places. And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two nipples: and let the cautery be like a cannula according to the previous form.
And if you wish your cautery to be by pricking with a cautery which is called a Point, whose form preceded in the cauterization of ear pain: and let there be points from thirty points up to others.
Then treat him with what precedes until he is healed.
And now let the cautery have three branches according to this form. Therefore cauterization is relieved when you do it with that juice along with three cauteries.
Chapter Twenty-Seven.
When the head of the humerus is dislocated due to humors, and it does not stay fixed within an hour of its return from its dislocation until a habit of returning is established, then afterwards it is dislocated by a slight movement, which happens as we have already testified: then it is necessary for you to first reduce the dislocation. Then the weak person is laid on his back, or on his sound side. Then raise the skin which is inside the nipple upwards with your left hand's fingers and if the joint dislocates inwards.
Then having a cautery with two points of fire. Whose shape is this.
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side and there will come a cauterization figure with four cauteries.
And sometimes the cauterization is done with a cautery having three points, therefore the figure of the cauterization then is of six cauteries and the points are tested according to subtlety.
And this is the shape of a cautery having three points.
And sometimes one more is added in this manner so there are eight cauteries.
Then place on the cautery pounded leeks with salt. Then make the weak person adhere to quiet so that the limb is not moved for a time until it is strengthened.
And if the dislocation is upwards, and this rarely happens, then cauterize it on the shoulder with a clavicle cautery, or by puncturing with many cauteries.
For the joint is strengthened and the humidity is removed and the weak person is healed.
Concerning the method of cauterizing the stomach.
When cold and much humidity happen in the stomach until they draw it away from its complexion and multiply catarrh to it and constant modes of treatment and do not help then it is necessary that the weak person be laid on his back and extend his legs and arms. Then cauterize with three cauteries, a cautery under the breastbone the size of one finger with a clavicle cautery, and two cauteries below from both sides of the one cautery until there comes a triangular figure of cauteries. And lengthen between each so they do not join together when they form pus.
And let the depth of the cautery be the amount of two-thirds the thickness of the skin.
And let the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without addition: and if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and let the cautery with which this cautery is made be one according to the shape of a circle according to this form.
And the stomach is cauterized by pricking it for one who is afraid of this cautery: and it is, that you sign on the stomach a point according to the amount which you wish with an encaustic: then cauterize it itself with a point cautery: then care for it with the care which preceded until it heals.
Concerning the way of cauterizing a cold epar.
When it happens in the epar that pain arises from coldness and humidity, or from thick windiness until superfluous egress departs from its own natural complexion, and the infirm is cured with what we said, and does not progress in it: then it is necessary that the infirm be laid on their back on their neck, and signs with an encaustic three cauteries according to this form, and this same quantity above the epar below the hypochondria where the elbow of a man reaches: and let the space which is between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger: and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight: and do not compress your hand much with the cautery.
And let the quantity of what is burned from the thickness of the skin be the quantity of half of it not added to: and let the infirm person stand on their own feet.
But if he is not standing, then let him lie down, who has already extended his legs and raised his arms.
This is the form of a cautery.
And it is indeed possible for you to cauterize with this cautery using a knife cautery when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
And guard yourself, so that you do not proceed too far in cauterization and the thickness of all the skin is hardened, therefore the whole body is hardened and it reaches the intestines; for the skin there is subtle, know therefore that.
On the method of cauterizing liver abscesses.
When it happens that you wish to know if the abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic: then if it is in the flesh of the liver, a weak pain and heaviness occur without sharpness; and if it is in the tunic of the liver, there is sharp vehemence with pain; and you see now that his treatment has wearied his doctors.
Therefore it is necessary for the sick person to lie on his neck. Then mark the place of the abscess with wax; then heat a cautery which resembles a ray. And this is its form. And cauterize with it one time until all the skin is burned and it reaches the underlying tissue, until all the pus comes out; then treat it with treatment for ulcers until it is healed.
And it is not necessary to use this species of cautery except by one whose study in the medical art is prolonged and through whose hands these kinds of illnesses concur many times with experiment; then let him dare to perform this type of operation.
But truly it is better for me to leave it.
On the method of cauterizing pleurisy.
The ancients said to cauterize cold pleurisy with a cautery using the roots of birthwort in this way. Take one longer root from the dried long roots of aristolochia, and let it be as thick as a finger. Then immerse it in oil and ignite it in fire. Then cauterize with one cautery in that which is between the continuation of the collarbone and the neck, and with two small cauteries a little below the guidezi towards the part under the beard.
And with two cauteries also in that which is between the fifth and sixth rib a little below towards the back; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach. And with three cauteries from behind: one in that which is between the two shoulder blades; and with two cauteries from the two sides of the chest, below the cautery which is between the two shoulder blades.
And it is not necessary to compress your hand with the cautery, rather let it be evident on the skin by smelling.
And certain ancients have said that there are men who use a cautery of iron similar to a spoke; they ignite it and insert it into that which is between the ribs until they reach the abscess with it, and pus flows out as we said in the abscess of the liver.
But in this perforation with a cautery there is fear, that either the weak one dies immediately, or a fistula occurs in the place, for which there is no healing.
Concerning the way of cauterizing the Spleen Chapter Thirty-Two.
When you treat a spleen ailment, as we said in the treatment of divisions of diseases and your treatment does not work, then there is a cautery for it according to three methods, all of which are correct.
One of which is to make three or four cauteries in a line according to the length of the spleen according to the figure of liver cauteries, the figure of which precedes.
And let there be between every cautery a quantity of the thickness of a finger, or more or less.
And let the method of cautery, which we have said in cautery of the liver be equally.
And do not press your hand with the cautery: and let the weak patient be supine on his back.
And another method of cauterization is: to have the cautery with two true points of fire, as we said in the chapter of shoulder dislocation: and elevate the skin which is directly over the spleen where the left elbow of the weak patient reaches: and let your elevation be such that you elevate the skin according to the width of the body so that the cauteries may fall according to the length of the body.
Then introduce the two points ignited deeply, until with them you penetrate the skin on the other side: then withdraw the cautery: thus there are made four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with another cautery having three points.
Then care for the cautery after you have dismissed it to discharge pus for many days: for it is more bringing together than any other which preceded from the cure.
On the method of cauterizing in dropsy.
A cautery does not fall in dropsy unless on the legs properly.
When you treat a dropsy with the methods of cure which we have said in the division, and the cure does not bring together then it is necessary that you cauterize it with four cauteries around the navel, and one cautery over the stomach, and another cautery over the liver, and one over the spleen, and two cauteries down the back between the vertebrae, and one directly on the chest, and another directly on the stomach: and let the quantity of depth of the cautery be near the thickness of the skin.
Then dismiss the cautery open so that it discharges pus for a long time.
And do not withhold the weak from treatment after cautery with him, for it is necessary that two intentions be brought together for him, and healing will hasten to him with the help of God.
But the form of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be clauilis, according to its previous form; and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped, according to its previous form.
Concerning the manner of cauterizing feet and legs.
When abscesses form in dropsy and are filled with clear water, you must cauterize on the back of the foot at the nocrati, which is between the auricular and annular bones; and raise your hand with the cautery, and do not twist it; then raise your hand and do not rub it at all.
For the clear water will redden, and the cautery should be of this form.
Then make two cauterizations on each leg, and let the cautery be made with the blade end of the cautery; and let the cauterization be made according to the length of the leg, one below the knee and the other below it, about the middle of the leg; and make two cauterizations on each thigh; and leave the cautery open without treatment for a long time so that some water may redden from it; then treat it with the rest as we have said.
Concerning the manner of cauterizing in the resolution of the abdomen.
Chapter Thirty-Five.
When there is a resolution of the abdomen from cold and moisture until the retentive and digestive powers which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and it is treated with modes of treatment and does not heal, and you see the sick person tolerating a cautery of abundant power, then cauterize him with a large cautery over his stomach, according to what preceded in the cauterization of the stomach with a circular cautery; and four slender cauteries in the circumference of the umbilicus, with a slender clauilis cautery; and a cautery above the groin above the ilium with a large one or two.
And if you see abundant moistures and a weak patient enduring it, then cauterize it with a cautery over the comb, and with a cautery over the whole groin; and perhaps you will add two small cauteries on the abdomen near the large one.
For it is a beneficial cure, whose benefit does not stray.
Concerning the Method of Cauterizing Hemorrhoids.
Chapter Thirty-Six.
When there are many old hemorrhoids or one in the anus, and they are from thick, cold humors, or corrupted humidities, and they are cured with what we said in the division, and the cure does not avail; then cauterize with three cauteries on the lower lumbar vertebra under the armpit a little triangularly, and with a cautery under the navel as if with two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is chilled and his food is not digested, and you see his face inflamed, then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cautery, according to what preceded; and with a cautery over his liver, and another over his spleen with a clauile cautery; and leave the cautery open for a time: then care for him until he is healed.
Chapter Thirty-Seven.
When you excise atherlomas, then heat a cautery that resembles a rod. Then insert the ignited one into the excised atherloma; and with your last hand until it reaches the orifice of the vein from which blood runs; do that once or twice.
If therefore there are many atherlomas, then cauterize each one with a cautery according to what we have described. Then care for them with what is beneficial to them from ointments, until they are healed.
And if you cauterize it with a large cautery over the alcatin, it is more final for healing.
On the Manner of Cauterizing a Fistula in the Anus.
Chapter Thirty-Eight.
When the sick person does not submit to incision and the work which we have described in its place, and is terrified by it, perhaps he is healed with a cautery.
Therefore when it happens to someone that a fistula has become old, and pus runs from it, and corrupt humors. It is therefore more fitting that which is necessary, so that you should test it with a delicate probe. Then recognize the depth of it with the probe.
Then ignite a cautery which is similar to a spoke. Then insert yourself ignited into the fistula and the quantity into which the peg entered.
And repeat the cautery over it until all those corrupt bodies are burned, once, or twice, or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
And guard yourself from burning the nerve, if it is there, or a large vein: or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder, or to the body of the intestines, then guard yourself from all these places.
And do not do this unless when the fistula is in a fleshy place: and you consider that it is not penetrating.
Then care for the place until it heals.
But if the place is sealed and materials are cut away from it, and it remains so for a long time, then you will know that it has now been completely healed.
And if materials are not cut away from it, then you will know that it is penetrating, or there is a corrupt opening deep within it, or as if it were one of those, the recollection of which will come in its place.
On the Manner of Cauterizing the Kidneys.
When pain occurs in the kidneys from cold, or from thick windiness, and the strength of the sick person is diminished because of it, then it is necessary to cauterize him above the navel, above the kidneys themselves, with a cautery over the whole kidney with a clauili cautery, of which mention was made previously.
And perhaps we should cauterize him a second time in the very navel. Therefore, three lines will come. Therefore, they will be better for relief.
Concerning the way of cauterizing the bladder.
When weakness and softening occur in the bladder from cold and dampness, until the sick person does not retain urine, then cauterize him in the lower part of the penis above the bladder, where the pubic hairs begin, and with a cautery from the right side of the penis, and another from the left: and let the length of that cauterization be according to the size of a knuckle; and cauterize him with a cautery below the back, or with two cauteries if he needs them; and let it be as mentioned previously, a clauili cautery.
Concerning the way of cauterizing the womb.
When cold and dampness occur in the womb, and because of it impregnation is prohibited, and her menses are corrupted, and their provocation is delayed, and pain occurs to her at their arrival, then it is necessary that she be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we said in the cauterization of the bladder, and with a cautery above the hip below the back, or with two cauteries: and let the cautery be clauili.
Concerning the way of cauterizing the ankle in dislocation.
When the mucous humors are poured out to the Anchae bone and become the cause of its displacement from its place; and the sign thereof is that one leg is lengthened over the other when they are compared together; and the place of dislocation is found empty in it.
Therefore it is necessary that you cauterize the weak bone of the Anchae itself with a cautery like a circle; after you have marked with an encaustic in a circle around the bone, as it revolves; and so that the bone itself falls in the middle of the circle.
And if you do not have this cautery present, then cauterize it with three cauteries, with a large olive-wood cautery; and let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the skin of the whole.
Then take care of it until it heals.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in sciatica.
When pain occurs in the Anchae bone, and its cause is cold and humors; and the weak person is cured with what we said in the division, and the cure does not take effect, and it becomes old; then it is necessary that you free the weak person from gross humors with fetid pills, or with artificial pills, and the like. Then cauterize him.
And the method of cautery in it is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
Cautery with fire is according to many methods.
One of which is that you cauterize over the Anchae bone itself with three triangular cauteries, according to this form. And make their depth good or bad. And let the space which is between each cautery be of the thickness of a finger; and let the cautery be olive-wood.
Sometimes, however, a cautery is made in the middle above the head of the wound itself. Therefore there are four cauteries.
And if you wish to cauterize with a circle, whose form precedes in the cauterization of a wide dislocation, with one: so that it is a circle containing the whole wound.
And burn the thickness of all the skin.
This is the method of cautery in sciatica, when the pain adheres to the wound itself and does not extend as far as the hip and leg.
But if it extends as far as the hip and leg, then cauterize it with two cauteries above the thigh, above the place to which the weakling points there, in which there is pain, and your cautery above the calf four fingers towards the woodland side a little: and let the cautery be sharp.
And let the depth of the cautery be according to the depth of the thickness of the skin.
But if the weakling points out that the pain extends as far as near the toes, then cauterize it there where he points with a point cautery, three, or four, or more, if he needs it.
And if he points out the pain to be below the knee towards the leg, then cautery it there with one sharp cautery.
And beware for yourself in all your cauteries, that you do not finish with the cautery so as to burn a nerve, or a large artery, and draw through it upon the weakling a bad harm, or contraction.
And I myself have now seen one and another, from those who have cauterized above the calf, and finished in the cautery, and the leg swelled up until a tumor reached the foot, and it was perforated all through, and the whole foot was corrupted: then there followed a rupture of the abdomen, and death after that.
If the pain is in both parts at the same time, cauterize both according to this method.
And certain wise men said that in the cauterization of a wide area, which cautery is of this mode. Make a cautery like a samarium iron, whose diameter is half a palm; and let it be at its opening according to the thickness of a fingernail, or a little less: and within that samarium let there be a third samarium.
And let the space that is between every samarium be by the quantity of a thumb joint; and let the samaria be open on two sides; and let the height of them be like a thumb joint, or two thumb joints; and make for them a handle from iron suitably fitted into the samaria.
Then ignite it in fire until it glows and projects sparks; then place it on a wide layer of pitch with the infirm person lying down on their healthy side. Therefore cauterize him with three circular cauteries in one spot.
Then let him go for three days. Afterwards apply a plaster with butter; and let the wound open for many days. Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
Says Albucasis, of this kind of cautery, O my son, we have used but little, because of the terror of its appearance; and therefore, because we found few who would endure it.
Nevertheless it is one of the good cauteries for him who suffers it, and finds with it its place.
This cautery however with medicines that harden is, for you to make two samaria having a perforated armilla, into which the bolt of its door descends from brass or iron, the length of a span; whose height shall be two thumb joints, or almost like them.
And there shall be a space which is between each quantity of the thickness of a finger, and they shall be open below and above; and let them contain themselves to each other, according to this form.
Then lay it upon the pillow, the weak one lying on his sound side. And press your hand upon the broad pillow greatly. Then pour between the two circles hot water, which has been heated with fire a little while, and hold it for the space of an hour; and let the weak one endure its biting and its burning, for he finds the bite like fire until the bite subsides.
Then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away the hot water from the whole pillow with sweet water; then let it alone for three days.
And put butter upon it until the blackness of the burning is removed; and let it alone for several days, and let pus flow from it. For this is the final thing in healing.
Then care for it with ointments until it heals.
But if the pain extends as far as the hip or the leg: make for him a bath that contains water according to what you did for the pillow equally.
And this is the way of hot water: and I have already written it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Take alkali and quicklime, of each a half part; grind each one and put them in a new pot, whose lower part is perforated with one small hole according to the quantity that enters the radius; and put under the bottom of the pot another glazed pot; and pour over the alkali and lime sweet water, which shall submerge each by a finger; after which you shall press them with your hand with good compression; and let the pot stand until sharp water descends to the lower part of the glazed pot.
Then add all that water and pour it over other lime; and strain until it is renewed.
It will then indeed be very sharp and strong, which is used in many medical operations and for cauterizing the remaining limbs. Because it makes the operation of fire itself effective.
And among medicines are those with which anchas are cauterized, even as tesisie and mastic, and lime with soap, so that both may be mixed together.
And Galen indeed recounted the cure of a certain man from antiquity, who was cured of pain in the ancha and sciatic vein; and he praised it greatly. And he said that he needed no other treatment and that he was healed by one application only, until he recounted that he perhaps entered a bath carried in and came out of it already healed.
And it is to be taken from green seitaragi; and if green is not found, take the dry, fresh one; and knead it well with a little fat and place it on the ancha where there is pain, or the leg, or in the hip; and bind it up, and leave it for three hours, or for as long as the weak person feels the soothing of the burning. Then put him into a bath.
When therefore his body is warmed, place him on a couch. For the pain subsides and he heals.
And know that no one should use a cautery with these medicines except after evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides who also said that goat dung when it is cauterized with the sciatic vein, strengthens it; and the cautery is made in this way. Take wool and soak it in old oil and place it on the deep spot which is between the big toe and the other toes and which is closer to the other toes.
Then take dry goat dung and inflame it in fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then place it upon wool and let it remain until it is extinguished. Then repeat that. Therefore do not cease to do that until sensation reaches the region of the neck by means of mediation and pain ceases.
And this method of cautery is called cautery vaccinum.
Concerning the cauterization of back pain.
Sometimes pain occurs in the back from many causes, either from a fall, or a blow, or excessive evacuation, and suchlike, from infusion of cold and humid matter; and cautery indeed does not apply except in this one kind which is caused by infusion of cold matter.
It is therefore necessary after evacuation of the sick person with fetid pills and suchlike, so that they are made upon the back, where there is pain, three lines according to the width of the almeidia itself, after making signs with a hot iron on each line five cauteries or more according to the quantity which comes from the tolerance of the strength of the sick person; and let the cauterization be done with a puncturing cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or four with a medium-sized clavil cautery according to this form.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in incipient gibbosity.
Very often this illness happens to young infants.
And the sign of its inception in children is: a constriction occurs upon him in breathing at elevation and motion; and the youth in the last vertebra of the back and its nodes, which has already begun to protrude above the other vertebrae.
Therefore when you see that, and wish to do it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery according to this form.
And let him apply the cautery over every part of the vertebrae equally; and if you wish to cauterize around the vertebrae with a pointed cautery two lines, or three. And let the points be near to each other.
Then care for the place until it heals with what we have said.
And beware that you do not apply the cautery in a gibbosity which occurs in nerve spasm.
Concerning the manner of cauterizing in gout and pains of the joints.
When the pains of the joints are from cold humors which flow to any limb of the body, then when they happen in the feet, it is customary for physicians to name that gout properly.
Therefore, when gout of a cold cause is treated with methods of treatment and the pains are not removed, then the cautery removes them.
And it is, that you cauterize him after evacuation around the joint of the foot with many cauteries; and let the cautery be olive-wood.
And if it seems necessary to you to make points on the face of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. But if the pains ascend as far as the knees or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize him over the whole knee with three or four cauteries on all sides with the same olive-wood cautery.
But if more of these cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize him. And do not submerge your hand with the cautery, rather let it be about the thickness of the skin only.
But if the pains ascend to the knees and back: then administer what we have said from the cautery in its own chapter.
But if the pains are only in the hands then make points around the wrists as they turn like two lines.
If pain remains in the fingers, then prick them, a point over every knuckle and a point over the comb of the hand.
But if the pains rise after days to the elbows, or to the shoulders, then cauterize both on every side.
And do not withdraw the weak from a good regimen, from the taking of medicines. For if a good regimen is made and the phlegm is evacuated, he will be healed with the help of God along with this cautery.
On the manner of cauterizing in ruptures.
When a rupture occurs in the groin and the intestine or omentum descends to the testicle, and it is beginning nearby: then it is necessary that you advise the sick man to cease eating on his day of fasting. And let him use laxatives so that the dung descends from his belly.
Then let him sit between your hands upon his back and instruct him to hold his breath until it emerges or the omentum or intestine appears.
Then reduce it with your fingers and mark with hot wax beneath the rupture on the bone of the hip with a sign whose extremity is like half a circle toward the upper part of the body.
Then apply a cautery iron, which has this shape, until it becomes white and throws sparks. Then return the intestine or omentum to its cavity. Then let the attendant place his hand over the spot so that the intestine does not come out and you have already opened between the sick man's thighs and placed a cushion beneath him, and one servant over his thighs and another over his chest who holds his hands.
Then place the cautery upon the very mark, your hand with the cautery standing straight. And hold it until you reach a bone with it; or repeat it with another cautery if you have not reached a bone with the first one up to the bone.
And carefully observe from the exit of the intestine during your cauterization so that you do not burn it, and death or great harm comes through it upon the sick person.
And know that when you do not reach a bone with the cautery, your operation is of no effect.
And it is necessary that the cautery for infants be slender according to their measure.
Then care with the remaining ointments until it heals.
And let the sick person lie on their back for forty days until the wound is sealed.
And it is necessary that you give them nourishment for the length of their healing time, which soothes their stomach so that the intestine does not come out during straining and excretion.
Then when they wish to rise after forty days, then apply a bandage well made and let them wear it for another forty days.
And they should abstain from labor, and the fullness of food and drink, and loud voices.
For when they use this regimen, they are healed with complete healing.
And I will speak of the cure of ruptures with an incision in its own chapter.
But when ruptures occur in the rest of the belly and they are beginning, and you wish that they not be added to, then cauterize their rupture with a round cautery according to its size; and let that which is burned be from then on like a third of it. Then care for it as we have said, and it will not be added to.
And indeed some of the first have said: that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery, according to this form.
After it is marked with a cautery and a line is placed which is across the width on the upper side of the rupture, and another line below. And place your hand in the middle with a hot iron.
But the cautery first is easier and better.
On the way of cauterizing in pains because of a fall, or a blow.
Chapter XLVIII.
When it happens in certain limbs from a fall, or a blow pain: and that pain persists for a long time, and healing does not occur in it with medicine: then it is necessary that it be cauterized with a point cautery.
And let the cautery of every limb be a cautery according to its size, and its suitability, and its weakness, and its power, and the location of the twist, and the pain from it.
Therefore if it is healed from the first cautery, it is well. If not: then repeat the cautery upon it.
For it is customary for these pains to change from one limb to that which is close to it. Therefore it is necessary that you follow them with a cautery until the weak one is healed.
On the way of cauterizing in leprosy.
Those with leprosy are sometimes greatly helped by cauterization. And especially the kind of leprosy which is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy: therefore when you wish to cauterize it consider.
Therefore if the leprosy is beginning and you have treated it with what we said in the division and it does not descend nor stand still: and you fear for the sick person that corruption may spread over their whole complexion: then cauterize them on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head known, and a second below it towards the forehead at the end of the hair, and two above the two horns, and one behind above the nape of the neck.
And finally impress your hand with a cautery for a short time, until it makes a slight impression on the mouth, and the barks are loosened from it: so that the expiration of gross vapors is relieved from it, and also cauterize the spleen itself with a cautery, as previously mentioned.
But if leprosy is already spread over the sick person and appears manifestly, then it is necessary to cauterize with these cauteries, which we mentioned in the head, and with a cautery on the extremity of the nose, and two cauteries on the two maxillas, and two cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one on the alhosos at the base of the tail and one above it, on itself in the almeidati: and two on the anchas: namely, on every ancha with one, and two on the knees: one on every knee, and two on the shoulders, and two on the elbows, and two on the tenderness of his chest. And cauterize him on every joint, from the joints of the fingers of his hands and feet: and cauterize on every heel of his feet, and the focilia of his hands.
And be careful of the nerves that are on the last part of the heel so as not to burn them.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the breastbone, and another on the stomach bone, and another on the liver.
And know that the more you add a cautery, the more benefit there is, and the more it brings together.
And know that the sick person does not find pain in the cautery as healthy people do: because his body is already stunned.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be of size and smallness according to the limbs and joints: as previously mentioned from the types of instruments.
Then take care of the cautery with flour of herbs and honey, and other care, until it is healed.
On the manner of cauterizing in a state of stupor.
When a limb is in a state of stupor and it is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it does not heal, then cauterize the stupefied limb with cauteries, according to the size or smallness of the limb.
And let your cautery be thrust into the thickness of the skin a little. Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
And sometimes it is cauterized for a certain stupor which happens to the hand and foot, in the vertebrae of the back near the exit of the nerves which move that limb; and the stupor is removed.
But let no one presume upon this unless he is wise in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves that move the body.
Head LI.
When an albara becomes old and nothing from the arts of medicine takes effect in it, then cauterize over it with a deep cautery for a little while, according to the amount of thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed and its color is changed.
Then care for it with flour of herbs and lentils with rose oil and leaves of arnoglossa and dove's blood and swallow's blood: let there be one part of each; mix all these things together and spread them upon a cloth and apply them to the place until it heals.
On the manner of cauterizing in Cancer.
When a cancer is beginning and you wish to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery all around it, as if it were revolving.
Wise men, however, have said that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle.
But it does not seem right to me; for I fear that it might be injured; and I have already seen that happen many times.
And it is better that it be cauterized around it with a circle, as we said, or with many cauteries.
Concerning the method of cauterizing an adubelati.
When someone has an adubelati and it is delayed in maturation, either because of excessive discharge making it so, or because of the weakness due to age, when they are elderly and have little blood, or because of time and the desire to hasten the maturation of the adubelati, then cauterize around it with many small cauteries by puncturing. Then let it alone. For it will hasten to maturity itself.
But if you wish to perforate it with a cautery, then use a fire-cautery which has this shape.
And place it in the middle of the adubelati until it penetrates the skin, and let the cautery be weak following this one so that the course of pus is relieved.
Then care for it until it heals.
Concerning the method of cauterizing a malignant corrosive.
Chapter Fifty-Four.
A corrosive is nothing but a corruption in a limb that wanders and eats it away, just as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore if you see a corrosive in a place that can tolerate a fire cautery then use many fire cauteries, small and large, according to what suits the place where the corrosive is.
Then cauterize it from every side until you eradicate the entire corruption and nothing remains of it at all.
Then let it alone for three days and place powdered sulfur mixed with oil on the cauterized areas until all the scabs and all corruption are eradicated.
Then care for it with ointments that generate flesh.
So if you see that after three days healthy flesh is born, in which there is no corruption, it is good.
And if not: then repeat the cautery over that which remained from the corrupt places.
And it is sometimes treated with a sharp medicine when corroding. For it arises in place of the cautery.
But cautery with fire is of quicker healing; and I have indeed already said cauterization of it with a sharp medicine in the division: therefore take that there when it is needed.
On the way of cauterizing warts and moles.
Chapter Fifty-five.
Very often this ailment occurs in the lower parts of the feet; and it is a thick, filtered thing which harms the foot.
And cautery indeed in them is according to two methods: cautery with fire and cautery with hot water.
But as much as with fire, that the cautery be concave like a vulture's quill; which should be made of iron according to the quantity it contains of warts from every part and have subtle edges.
Then place it ignited upon the wart. Then revolve your hand with the cautery around the wart until the cautery reaches the depth of the wart; and leave it for three days until it begins to discharge pus. Then apply a plaster with wild mallows crushed with salt; and leave the plaster upon it at night. For it will be eradicated from its roots.
Then care for the place with an ointment that generates flesh until it is healed.
But if they are unconverted and very often occur on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet; then administer to them cautery with hot water; and it is that you take a cannula from bronze, or iron, or from a vulture's quill; and place it upon the wart, or althelul. Then pour a small amount of hot water into the cannula; hold your hand, and revolve it with pressure from your hand for a short time, so that the edge of the cannula is imprinted on the root of the nail, and the hot water finds its way deep down to the root of the nail; and let the patient wait for a little while above the bite of the hot water for an hour.
Then dismiss him, for the nail will be extracted with its roots.
Do this one by one until you come to all of them that are in the body.
Then care for them after they are extracted with that which produces flesh from ointments.
On the method of cauterizing in a tremor.
When it happens to someone that a tremor occurs from cold in the nerve, or from quartan fever, or some other cause: then it is necessary that you cauterize him with four cauteries, or five on the vertebrae of the back, and between every vertebra a cautery, and one on his chest, and one on his stomach.
For the tremor subsides with an olive-wood cautery, and hastens the healing of a cold illness.
On the method of cauterizing Albathir.
Chapter Fifty-Seven.
Sometimes foul Albathir are expelled from the body, that is, pustules which are made from corrupted thick humors.
Therefore, when they first appear, it is necessary that they are cauterized over the entire head of the pustule with a fine cautery made from myrtle wood, whose tip is ignited with fire. Or with a long aristolochia root. Or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and they do not grow larger; and the excess is broken down making them, and they are healed from them.
However, it must be done after evacuation with bloodletting.
On the method of cauterizing arterial bleeding in a wound.
Very often it happens that blood flows from an artery which has been cut at a wound, which occurs externally, or at the incision of an abscess, or a cautery of a limb, and similar things: and it is difficult to stop it.
Therefore, when this happens to someone, then hurry with your hand to the opening of the artery, and place your index finger upon it: and press it hard until the blood is blocked under your finger, and nothing comes out from it.
Then place a small olive-wood cautery in the fire and many more of a large number: and blow upon them until they become very hot.
Then take one from them, either small or large, according to the wound and the place where the artery has been ruptured, and apply the cautery upon it, after which you quickly remove your finger: and hold the cautery until the bleeding is stopped.
And if it is expelled when you raise your finger from the opening of the artery, and you extinguish the cautery, then quickly take another cautery from those which are prepared in the fire.
Therefore, do not cease to do that with one after another until the bleeding is stopped.
And be careful not to burn the nerve which is there, and cause other harm to befall the weak patient.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, then it is not possible to stop it: especially when the artery is large, except with one of four methods. Or with a cautery, as we have said. Or with extraction when it has not been extracted. For when it is extracted, its extremities are contracted and the bleeding is stopped. Or it should be tied with a strong ligature. Or let medications of a kind that stanch blood be placed upon it, and let it be compressed with a decent ligature.
But he who performs its excision with a ligature, and constriction with cloth, or the application of burning agents, and similar things, does not thoroughly heal it except rarely.
But if it should happen to someone and there is neither a physician present nor medicine: then let him begin by placing the index finger upon the orifice of the vein itself, as we have described, and constrict it tightly until the blood is obstructed from the upper part of the wound and above the artery. And let the finger not be removed, but constantly apply cold water of intense coldness over it until the blood congeals and thickens, and is cut off.
And meanwhile, let him consider what he needs from cautery or medicine.
On Incision, Perforation, and Phlebotomy in Wounds and Similar Things.
We have already said in the First Chapter that every ailment in which it is fitting to use fire for cautery and burning medicine, its occasions, its causes, its instruments, and the forms of cauteries.
And I have placed there chapters from head to foot.
And I will proceed in this chapter the same way, so that it may relieve the inquirer seeking his question.
And before I begin that, it is necessary for you to know, O son, that in this chapter there is terror from what is in the First Chapter on cauterization.
And on account of that it is necessary that there be more intense caution in it, because in the operation which is in this chapter, evacuation often occurs with blood, with which life stands at the opening of a vein, or incision over an abscess, or opening of an exit wound, or treatment of a wound, or extraction of an arrow, or incision over a stone, and things similar to these: from all of which association trembling and fear arise, and death falls upon many of them.
And I warn you, lest it fall upon you in which there is hesitation, for sometimes there fall upon you in this art ways of men with ways of infirmities. For among them is he who becomes angry with his illness, and death is light to him because of the violence he finds from his infirmity and the length of his malice. And with illness there is fear which signifies death.
And among them is he who gives you his lute player and enriches you with him, hoping for healing, and his illness is pernicious.
Therefore it is not fitting that you consent to him who comes to you from among them, whose manner is such. And let your caution be stronger than your desire and your greed. And do not presume anything from him unless after certain knowledge which verifies with you that which has come to a laudable outcome.
And use in the care of all your sick, prognosis and indication concerning it so that health may suitably come about.
For in that there is help for you in acquiring fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire in you his understanding, and not take away from you direction and inspiration for it is in his hand.
And I indeed arranged this chapter distinguishing it by chapters, according to what preceded in the chapter on Caustic, from the neck down to the feet so that what you desire and need from it may be relieved for you.
On the treatment of water which collects in the heads of infants.
Chapter I.
Know that this infirmity often happens to boys at birth: or when the midwife tightens the head of the boy without ease.
And whenever it happens also from a hidden cause which is not known.
And I myself have not seen this illness in anyone but children, and death hastened to all of them whom I saw: therefore it seemed best to me to forgo operating on it.
And I myself saw a boy from them whose head was filled with water, and his head swelled every day until he could not sit upon himself because of the size of his head: and the moisture increased until he died.
And this moisture indeed either gathers between the skin and bone or gathers beneath the bone upon the suture.
And the operation on that, if the moisture is between the skin and bone, and it is a small abscess, then it is necessary that you make a single fissure in the middle of the head one finger wide: and let the length of the fissure be about two knuckles, until the moisture runs out.
And this is the form of a spatula.
If therefore the moisture is greater and the abscess is larger, then make those two fissures according to this form.
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and its sign is that you see the sutures of the head open from every side: and water is depressed when you press it with your hand towards the interior, and it does not hide from you: then it is necessary that you make three fissures in the middle of the head according to this manner.
And after the incision extract all the moisture. Then bind the fissures with cloths and lint. Then embrocate it from above with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then loosen the bandage, and heal the wound with tents and ointments.
And do not cease to bind the head evenly. And feed the sick person with all dry food of little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another method of incision is to consider where the magnitude of the abscess appears and the collection of water.
For sometimes there is more in the back of the head, or in the forehead, or on the right, or on the left.
Therefore ascend with an incision where you see the abscess and filling of water; and split it according to what is possible for you.
And observe that you do not cut into an artery and that a flow of blood occurs, and the sick person dies from that flow with the evacuation of moisture.
Concerning the incision of arteries which are behind the ears.
Chapter II.
When it happens to someone that there are catarrs to the eyes, or to the chest, and it becomes old, and treatment with medicine does not help; then the final treatment in that case is the incision of these two arteries.
Therefore it is necessary that when you wish to cut into them, that the sick person should shave their head. Then rub the place with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear. Then let the sick person tighten their neck with any cloth of theirs. Then consider where the vein pulses. And the locations of both are places which are behind the ears depressed: and it is rarely hidden, except in certain people.
Then mark with hot wax over each one; and cut both with a scalpel on both sides, the incision reaching the mouth; and let it be done across the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the scalpel under the artery, and cut it upwards with an incision.
And let the length of the incision be like two joined fingers.
For when a vein is cut, blood comes out with a throbbing flow which leaps to the insides by frequent jumps.
But if the artery does not appear to the senses, then it is necessary that you measure from the ear a distance of three fingerbreadths. Then mark with hot wax and cut upwards to the mouth.
And that which must be emitted from the blood is six ounces, and perhaps you will emit more, or less from it. All of that according to the quantity which appears to you from the strength of the weak person and the repletion of their artery.
Then consider the wound. Then if anything remains at the mouth of the wound from the incision, then cut that out so that a hot abscess may not occur; then bind the wound with lint from linen cloth.
Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
Concerning the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
Chapter III.
When it happens to a man that an old hemicrania, or acute catarrh occurs because of acrimonious humors, and heat in the fleshy parts of the temples, or an old, vehement soda, and similar things to those; and he is treated with methods of medical treatment, and it does not help: then we have experienced in these illnesses the extraction of arteries from the temples, or their cauterization, as we have described.
And the method of procedure in their extraction is that the weak person shaves the hairs which are in the temples, and stretches towards the apparent artery in the temple. For it itself shows itself to you from its pulse, and rarely is it concealed except in a few men, or extreme cold.
But if it is concealed from you, then let the weak person bind their head with any cloth; then rub the place with a rough cloth. Or steam the place with hot water until it appears to you with manifest appearance. Then take the speculum, which I had previously prepared. Then scrape away the skin with it easily, until you reach the artery. Then project a hook into it and draw it upwards until you draw it out from the skin, and make it come out from all the tunics which are under it.
If, however, the artery is slender, then envelop it with the extremity of a hook. Then make an incision into it according to the amount by which its extremities will be extended and contracted so that a flow of blood does not occur. For if it is not incised and not cut off, the blood does not rise completely.
Then evacuate from six ounces of blood up to three.
But if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a doubled, strong silk thread or with silkworm gut so that decay does not hasten to it before the wound consolidates and a flow of blood occurs.
Then make an incision into the excess which is between the two ligatures. Do this in that hour or after another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery up to the bone with a knife cautery until its extremities fall away and it remains in place of the same operation.
And this is a better procedure unless the patient has a fever or an overheated complexion. Because a cautery is one of those things that help to finish humidities. Therefore it is a better remedy.
And it is necessary after the extraction of arteries that the place be filled with old cotton and poultices be placed on top, loosely made.
And after it is dissolved, it should be treated with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow and with dressings until it heals.
But if meanwhile while you are operating a flow of blood occurs from the artery, then hurry to cut it off with a cautery or to fill the place with wax and bind your hand until the bleeding is stopped. But if none of these things are present to you, then place your finger on top of the place until the blood clots. Embrocate the place with water of sharp cold until the sharpness is stilled, and bind it as needed.
And because that which is lighter and easier to extract is the vein, it is so that you should cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives; and let the sharpness of the two knives be similar to a razor. However they are of much less sharpness than two knives. For if they are sharp like two knives, cold will quickly occur to both; and they will not strike the flesh with speed. Therefore since there is a little thickness in them, the heat of the fire is retained in them and the flesh is cut quickly; with this therefore it is better, lighter, and easier work.
And this is the form of the cautery.
And let the space which is between the two knives be the thickness of a finger, after you have marked two places with a cautery; and lay both ignited strongly until they reach the mouth, and fall upon the vein in two places: so that what is between its ends may be lengthened. For they are not entirely consolidated with this cautery.
Chapter Four.
On the treatment of a sharp, persistent flow of tears from the eyes.
When the tears are persistent, and their flow is from the veins which are above the outer skull; and no medicinal treatment confers anything with medicines, and you see the face of the sick person already reddening, and he feels a movement on his forehead like that of ants walking; and his eyes are weakened, moist, so that his eyelashes have already been corroded: and his eyelids are heated from the sharpness of the tears; then the ancients used to employ this operation in their treatment, and they called it treatment with the sword.
And it is so that you order the sick person to shave the hairs which are on his forehead. Then make three incisions in the forehead equidistant according to the length of the forehead; and let the length of an incision be like two fingers, and one incision be equidistant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second a little behind the length of the motion of the masticatory muscles, and the third on the other side.
Then introduce a speculum with two pointed ends, which soon follows this form. From the incision which is from the side of the temple up to the second incision; and with it all the skin which is between the two incisions, together with the sifac, which is above the mouth. Then also do that from the middle incision up to the second incision. Then extract this speculum and introduce into the first incision again another instrument which is called a sharp curette, blunt on one side, not sharp on the other side. And this is its form.
And place its sharp side against the flesh joined with skin, and its blunt side towards the mouth; and press it until it reaches the middle fissure; and cut off with it all the vessels which descend from the head to the eyes: except that the incision continues until it appears from the skin.
Then do that in the middle fissure up to the other fissure.
And after an equal quantity flows out from the blood, press out the places from lumps of clotted blood.
Then place in all the fissures a lint made from old linen and put over them compresses soaked in wine, oil, or vinegar. And see that a hot abscess does not occur.
And on the third day loosen the ligature and administer a plentiful infusion with warm water. Then care for it with royal ointment and other remedies that heal wounds until it is healed.
Chapter Five.
On the treatment of acute tearings and discharges to the eyes from within the head.
When someone has acute, sharp, and persistent discharges, and you see their eyes are weakened, small, and their gaze has already become feeble; and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hair falls out from them, and there is a sharp, piercing pain deep in the head, and consequent sneezing: then take from these occurrences that those humors and discharges do not come except from many veins.
And the better cure for them is this. And it is, that you order the sick person to shave their forehead. Then make one fissure in the middle of the forehead, or a little to one side, by its width, and begin with the fissure from the left temple to the right temple; and let the incision be up to the mouth; and extend your hand away from the temporal muscles which move at mastication: until when the mouth is exposed; and you will dry up all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate between the two lips of the fissure with old cotton or linen cloths. Then bind over it with lint; and saturate the lint with wine and oil so that a hot abscess does not occur.
And when you loosen that, and you see that the hot abscess has already subsided; then it is necessary that you freeze the mouth until flesh begins to grow in it.
Then care for it with a drying regimen that causes the flesh to grow; such as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony; and prepare an adhesive plaster from them, and apply it to the birth of flesh in these wounds.
Chapter VI.
On the treatment of what falls into the Ear.
Everything that falls into the ear is of one of four kinds: either a mineral stone or something like a stone, such as iron and glass; or it is from a plant, such as chickpeas and beans; or it is a flowing substance, such as water and vinegar, and things similar to them; or some animal.
Therefore, when a stone or something like a stone falls into the ear that neither adheres nor grows in the ear, expose the ear to the sun: then if you see the stone, distill something from oil of violets or sesame into the ear. Then perform its extraction, and make him sneeze with something sugared, and press his nostrils at the time of the sneeze, after you have placed around the ear wicks from cloth or wool, and extended the ear upwards.
Very often it comes out with this care.
But if it does not come out, then perform its extraction with forceps, that is, thin Pizigaroli: whose form is this.
If, therefore, it comes out with forceps, it is good.
And if not, then perform its extraction with a thin blind hook of few twists.
If, therefore, it does not come out through that, then make a tube from bronze, and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal much, and pack what is around the tube with softened wax mixed with oil so that there is no way for air except through the tube: then extract it with your own breath with strong suction.
Very often it comes out by what we have described. But if it does not come out this way: then take a small amount from hellebore or viscus, that is, prepared gluten with which birds are caught: and place it on the end of a probe after you have wrapped a well-positioned cotton over it: then insert it into the ear canal with ease, after you have dried the ear from moisture.
Therefore if it does not exit with all that we have described, then hurry to incise it before a hot abscess or spasm occurs.
And the method of incision is that phlebotomists make it first on the cephalic vein and extract from it blood according to his strength. Then make the infirm person sit between your hands and turn his ear upward, and make a small incision at the root of the ear near its fat in a depressed place; and let the incision be moon-shaped until you reach the stone; then remove it with what is possible for you from the instruments.
Then sew up the incision quickly with care, and attend to it until it heals.
But if the thing falling into the ear is a single grain that grows and swells, then administer its extraction.
But if it does not yield to your efforts, then take a thin, delicate spatula of this shape.
And administer with it the cutting off of that kind of grain that falls into the ear, and do not do this when you think that the grain is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, until you put many splinters on it; then extract them with hooks or with a delicate probe or with suction as we have said, for its extraction is alleviated.
But with regard to water that enters the ear, it is necessary for the infirm person to use sneezing when it is first instilled; and he has already filled his ear with a little old cooked oil; and he lies upon the ear in which there is water. If therefore it exits through that route, it is good.
And if not: then take many stones according to the length of a finger, thin and smooth, and heat them slightly with fire; and let the infirm person insert one of them into the opening of his ear; and jump on one foot from that side, and strike it with another stone on top of the stone which is in the ear. Therefore it shall not cease to do this with stone and stone, until all the water has come out.
And now the water comes out so that you may take one from a crucible, or from a reed, and insert one end into the ear; and set fire to the other end until most of it is burned. Then repeat with another reed and do this many times until all the water has come out; and extract it with a tube as was previously described in the stone.
But in the extraction of an animal entering it, if it is of a small body, such as a flea and the like, take care of it as I said in the division.
But if it is of large body, which appears to the senses; then administer its extraction with gestures and hooks; and its matter is easier than all that are held in the ear.
But in the extraction of a generated worm in the ear, when you care for it with that which we said in the division and in the treatise on distillations, and your treatment does not succeed; then it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sun. If therefore anything from worms appears there, then extract it with gestures or with delicate hooks.
But if nothing appears there, then take a tube, whose form is narrow below, wide above; and insert the slender end into the ear according to the quantity that the weak one bears it: then suck with it with strong suction. Do this many times until all the worms come out.
But if they do not obey you to go out, then smear the circumference of the tube with wax, as I said in the stone.
But if they do not come out with what we said; then administer distillations which the ancients have already experienced in the infection of worms; and you will find that in the treatise on distillations.
Let your effusion with which you pour oils and medicines into the ear be with this instrument, whose form is depicted here. Make it yourself of silver or bronze, narrow below, in which there be a small hole, wide above.
Let it therefore be such that driving what is in the cavity of the cannula is made of bronze cleanly. And if you wish, take a ray and wrap cotton about its end with decent winding; then pour oil or juice or whatever you wish from these medicines into the cannula; and let it be in the ear; then insert the ray with the cotton on top and press it with your hand with temperate compression until the oil is driven into the cavity of the hearing and the sick person feels it within; and let what is poured into the ear already be warmed a little with fire; and beware that nothing which distills into it is very cold, for medicines do not endure it.
Chapter VII.
Concerning the treatment of accidental hair loss of the ear.
Sometimes certain infants depart from the wombs of their mothers not perforated.
And it also happens to certain men hair loss in the ear canal from a wound or flesh born therein.
And this hair loss sometimes happens deep within the cavity of the ear which does not follow sight; and sometimes it happens near the outer opening a little and follows sight.
That therefore which occurs deep within the ear and which does not grasp sight is in many dispositions difficult healing.
And in that which follows sight, it is necessary that you place the ear of the sick person in the sun and look into it; then if you see an apparent hair loss, open it with a delicate speculum, whose form is as follows: let its extremity in which there be a certain small width have a certain pointed part; and let the remaining speculum be of two smooth sides so that it does not injure the ear.
If therefore the growth is fleshy and arises within the ear canal: then seize it with a fine hook, and cut into it with vigorous ease until all the flesh is removed.
But if the growth is deep within the ear: then take a fine, smooth probe and heat it slightly with fire; then insert it into the ear canal.
If therefore you feel the growth with it, as the one afflicted finds with hearing impairment, try to open it with ease: and beware not to wound the nerves of the ear.
Then place in the ear a lint according to the size of the opening which you enclosed in Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are sure of the wound's healing.
Or take lint and steep it in rose water, and sprinkle upon it ground tragacanth, and use it.
But if you see that the ear is already abscessed: then it is necessary to remove the lint and let it remain with another lint which you wrap in cerate made with rose oil until the hot abscess subsides; then care for it until it heals.
But if bleeding should occur: then immerse a sponge or cloths in cold water and place them over the ear; and use the remaining treatment which stops the aforementioned bleeding as described in the treatise on distillations.
Concerning the care of Althea eyelids.
Chapter Eight.
These Althelias which occur on the eyelids are sometimes moist and sometimes dry.
Therefore it is necessary to hold them with tweezers or a hook and cut them from their roots with a scalpel. Then place ground tragacanth on the spots.
But if blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a fine lentil-shaped cautery.
And to cauterize them is better after the incision. For it often happens that they return when something remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and they do not return.
On the treatment of Hailstones on the eyelids of the eye.
Chapter IX.
It often happens that something occurs in the eyelids which resembles a Hailstone in its firmness and hardness, and on account of this it is called a Hailstone: and it is an aggregation of thick humidity in the upper eyelid and the lower eyelid.
The operation on them therefore is, that you consider then if it is a Hailstone arising in it, which appears from the eyelid and moves to every part, and its matter is easy.
Make therefore a fissure upon it across its width. Then pare it away from every part with ease until it comes out. Then suspend it with a hook and cut it off.
But if its excision is not prepared for you except after you penetrate the eyelid with an incision a little, then it harms the weak one in some way.
But if the fissure is large: then join it with suture and care for it until it heals.
And if it is small, no harm will come to you from it. For ointment restores it and makes it flesh.
And if the Hailstone is inclined towards the inner parts of the ear towards the inner surface, then invert the eyelid and suspend the Hailstone with a hook: besides which you will need an incision and press it from every part.
But if the eyelid is lengthened by the incision, it harms no one.
Then wash the eye after the incision of the Hailstone with salt water and care for the place with that which makes flesh until it heals the weak one.
On the treatment of Axirnaths of the eyelids.
Chapter Ten.
Axirnath is a fat which is generated in the tunics of the upper eyelid; and it most often happens to boys; and it weighs down their eyes, and catarrhs happen to them in the mornings, and they are not able to look at the light of the sun, therefore because tears hasten to them, and for that reason you see them lying down on their faces always, and sleeping upon them, and their eyelids are moist under their eyebrows, which have already been covered by swelling; and indeed the prominence of Axirnath is apparent to the eye, and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel Axirnath between them.
And the method of its operation is that the sick person should put his head in your lap.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare on it lint, and make from that lint a circle according to the quantity which contains the Axirnath from every side. Then put it on top of it and press with your fingers from every side so that the Axirnath gathers in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle of that moisture with a scalpel making incisions across its width, and let there not be an incision larger than that which is made in bloodletting deep.
Or it is necessary that you cut the entire skin until you reach the Axirnath, for in many dispositions it proceeds from the incision according to the shape of a white tallow candle.
Therefore extract it with the cloth which you infiltrated between your fingers to the outside; and you turn your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed; and be careful not to add to the incision so that you do not reach with the scalpel to the eye, and injure it.
But if Axirnath does not appear to you at the beginning of the incision, you add a little to the incision with ease until the Axirnath proceeds. Then extract it as we have said.
Then immerse cloths in vinegar and water, and place them over the area, and bind it with bandages.
And there are those among men who grind salt, and place it in the cavity of the fissure, so that it liquefies what remains from that moisture.
Then care for it until it heals.
But if an abscess occurs in a warm place, then treat it with soothing plasters until it heals.
Concerning the ways of softening the eyelid of the eye, that is, when the eyelid of the eye softens, from which it becomes swollen as it should not.
Chapter XI.
When hairs are born on the eyelids of the eye in addition to the course under the natural hairs, and they grow long: then they harm the eye, and cause illnesses to occur, such as constant tears, and softening of the eyelids, and leukoma, until it becomes a cause for the destruction of the eye.
And indeed Ataxmir of the eye is cured according to four methods. Or by cautery with fire. Or with a sharp medicine, according to what has been stated in the chapter on cautery. Or Ataxmir is cured by incision and suture. Or through reeds, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you place the head of the sick person in your lap. Then turn back the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If therefore it is turned back, it is good. And if not: introduce a needle into it, in which there is a thread from the lower part of the eyelid, and make the needle with the thread penetrate from above, and let it be near the hairs themselves, that is, near the edge of the eyelid, in which the hairs are born: and draw the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn it back with a rod.
Then find on the inner part of the eyelid under the added hairs with the speculum entering from the greater lacrimal to the lesser lacrimal.
Then extract the thread, and place under the eyelid a small pledget from linen, or cloth; then mark upon the eyelid with resin, so that it be like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
However, it is necessary that the shape be made according to the quantity and elevation of the eyelid; because now it is diversified in men.
For among them there are some who need a large quantity to be cut from the eyelid, according to the quantity which is softened by the eyelid.
Then with the speculum find upon the two lines which you have marked, and begin from the greater lacrimal to the lesser lacrimal, and let there be one fissure near the natural hairs, such as is the thickness of a radius.
Then introduce the hook into one of the two angles of the skin. Then flay the whole thing itself. Then unite the two lips with a suture, with a sharp needle and fine woolen thread; and cleanse away the blood, and make what runs over from the threads adhere to the two eyebrows, with certain imperceptible things, if you wish to do it; and if not, do not trouble yourself.
Then leave the suture and threads until three or four days; afterwards attend to it.
And if you wish, leave the wound without a suture and attend to it with something that dries and constricts it. For the eyelid is raised at the sealing of the wound and its union; but it will be better in the future.
This method of healing was taught by the ancients from Ataxmir.
However there is solicitude over the sick person in it and it is from a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And another method is in Ataxmir also: and it is, that you make a sign upon the eyelid in the shape of a myrtle leaf, as we have described.
Then raise the eyelid with three hooks separate or joined together, according to this following form, then cut off what is superfluous with small forceps, according to this form, with equal incision.
But if it is not possible for you to hold a hook, and it does not align: then take a needle in which there is a thread, and insert it into the middle of the figure; and insert another thread near the larger lacrimal, and a second thread near the smaller lacrimal: and gather the threads between your fingers with equality.
Then raise your hand with equal elevation; and raise the skin above which the cotum is signed, as we have described.
Then join the two lips of the wound with suture; and care for it until it heals.
But if an abscess should occur at your incision or fissure: dry it up with cerate and such like, from soothing ointments.
And sometimes it happens to the eyelid also, that its hairs turn.
Therefore it is necessary for you to use what we have said in the incision; but the suture of both is more artful. Concerning the care of Ataxmir with dogs.
And it is, that you turn the eyelid, and split the fissure which is inside, according to what I have described. Then with art make two reeds or two slender pieces of wood: whose length is according to the length of the eyelid, and their width is less than the width of a spatula; and you have already cut into the ends of each from both sides where you hold the threads.
Then gather each with subtlety above that which overflows from the eyelid of the eye, and tighten the two reeds from both sides with a strong binding, and leave it for several days. For indeed the tightened skin will die and blacken and putrefy until it falls off by itself.
Therefore if it is delayed, then cut it with forceps. Then care for it until it heals.
When therefore it firms up, the eyelid is elevated: and the hairs do not sting.
And this is the form of two tubes, which you will make according to this figure and quantity in length and width.
Chapter Twelve.
Concerning the elevation of stinging hairs in the eye with a needle.
The operation on it is that you take a fine needle and insert into it a fine, smooth silk thread. Then you gather its ends and tie each with a fine knot: and let the length of the threads be one palm.
Then you place another fine thread underneath it briefly in a linen cloth and tie its ends if you wish.
Then let the patient place their head in your lap and be near the sun so that the operation is illuminated: because it is a subtle or minute operation.
Then introduce the needle with the thread into the root of the eyelid and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly until you pull out the natural hair from above.
Then draw the hair up to above the thread and introduce it into the thread; if there is one, or two, or three, no more.
Then draw your hand with it until the hair comes out with the thread in the eyelid with the natural hair.
But if the thread is pulled and the hair does not come out with it, pull the thread down, with the thread which you have placed in it, until the thread comes out from the upper hole, and look at it with the eye; then pull the thread and the thread and take both out and close the eye, and leave it closed for two days or three until the hair adheres to its place and flesh grows over it.
But if the hair is short, then either join to it a long hair from the natural hairs and it is raised with it, or leave it until it lengthens after a time, and then raise it.
Chapter XIII.
When this alxatrati happens to the eye, it is called Leporina.
And this alxatrati is either natural or accidental.
Accidental therefore comes from the consolidation of a wound, or an incision, or a cautery, and things similar to these.
And the method of treatment for it is that you cut open that consolidation and separate its lips, and place in it a licorice from flax, and bind it until it heals.
And it is not necessary that you use things in its treatment which dry and constrict; for if you do that, the alxatrati returns worse than it was: rather use things in it which soften, such as fenugreek: and embrocate with water in which marshmallow has been cooked, flaxseed: and an ointment of dyaquilon, which has been liquefied with some oil; and wrap it with licorice and care for it.
And the treasure of your healing is to try with all your ingenuity that it does not become consolidated according to the form which it had at first.
And this operation which we have said is nothing but a certain rectification of the Alxatrati so that the shape of the place does not return according to what it was at all.
On the treatment of the Alxatrati which is done in the lower eyelid and it is a wrinkling or contraction upwards to the right and left.
Chapter Fourteen.
This Alxatrati which occurs below is the one that is truly called Alxatrati. And it is natural and accidental.
And the accidental kind arises from a wound, or fissure, or cautery, and things similar to these.
And the way of operation on it is to take a needle with a double thread and dye it in flesh and make it penetrate from the left tear duct to the right tear duct until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh upwards with the needle and cut it with a broad spatula. If therefore the shape of the eyelid returns as it should be, it is good.
And if not, take a ray and place it in the fissure and turn it with the eyelid; and make two fissures on the inner side of the eyelid, and let the ends of the two fissures be from the two angles of the incision until they come together and an angle is made from them: until when they are joined the shape of them becomes this shape, which is the Greek letter lambda.
Then remove that flesh by the amount which is the sharp side below it from that which follows the eyelid. Then join the separated parts; or sew them together with wool thread.
Then care for them with what we have said, about softening medicines and cleansing ones until they are healed.
And if a laceration should occur from a fissure, and by suture or cautery: then it is necessary that you split the fissure flat under the eyelashes, even according to what preceded. Then separate between the two lips with a ligature, according to what we have said.
And the sum of the matter concerning the treatment of a laceration, whether it is above or below, is that the operation should proceed therein according to what is prepared from the form of the laceration.
For it is of many different forms; and a prudent craftsman prepares his skill in whatever way is possible for him, until he restores the shape to its natural form or near it, and himself, according to what suits him from the operation and instruments in very many arrangements.
Chapter Fifteen.
Concerning the adhesion of the eyelid of the eye with the conjunctiva or cornea.
Sometimes this consolidation happens to many people, so that the upper eyelid becomes consolidated with the white of the eye and prevents it from its natural operations.
Therefore it is necessary that you introduce the extremity of a radius under the eyelid and raise it upward: or extend it with a hook: then incise the adhesion with a fine spatulim which is not sharp in its incision but rather blunt; so that the infirm person will not be agitated at the operation, and the spatulim be removed and injure the eye with its sharpness: and let your incision be as if you were scraping away that adhesion with ease until when the eyelid returns to its natural form and the whole adhesion is healed.
Then pour salt water into the eye, with blue water washing it: or distill into it from a sieve made, from ziniar dissolved in water.
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a ligature of flax: and place wool infused with egg white on top of the eye: and after the third day use a sieve and apply solid dressings until it is healed.
On the cutting of the nail and the prominence of flesh of the tear duct.
Chapter Sixteen.
Know that the nail is according to two manners. Either it is nervous; and it is similar to a hard, subtle reed. Or it is not nervous, similar to frozen white humidity; which when it touches iron, or you try to take it with a hook, it is cut, and the hook does not hold fast in it.
And both kinds do not begin, except from the greater tear duct, until it goes gradually, until it covers the sight, and prohibits light and the movement of the eye.
And the manner of operation in its cutting is: that the patient should place his head in your lap. Then open his eyes, and lift the eyelid with your hand. Then collect the nail with a hook of few duplications, and extend it upward. Then take a needle, and insert into it a hair from the hairs of a horse, an ox, or a cow; and let the thread be strong, and double the extremity of the needle a little, and fix it in the middle of the nail: and penetrate it with the needle, and tie the nail with thread, and extend it upward; and skin with the hair the side of the nail which follows the pupil, as if you press it with the hair up to its last part.
Then cut the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a fine scalpel, or with small forceps; and let the natural flesh of the tear duct be released, so that a continuous flow of tears does not occur from its incision.
And sometimes the nail is extended with a hook alone; or with thread, as we have said. Then it is skinned with a gentle scalpel, of which this is the form.
And be careful that the scalpel does not touch the corneal tunic, and a rupture occurs in it, and the pupil is perforated.
Then after the incision, throw into the eye something crushed salt, or a powder made from alum, and leave it until another day. Then take care of it with what is necessary until it heals.
But if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot insert a point into it, nor does a hook take hold in it, then this kind of nail is often cured with medicines and heals as I described in the division.
But if you wish to cut it, then open the eye of the weak person and take a subtle spatula, gentle, of weak sharpness, according to this form. And shave off the nail from above with subtlety. But if you see that it becomes thinner and breaks, and the razor presses into it, then distill from your own hour into the eye a powder made from alum, or red ochre, or crushed salt: and bandage the eye until another day.
Then repeat the operation on it until the whole of it is removed. Unless there is a hot abscess in your eye, then let it be and take care of the abscess until it heals.
Then repeat the operation on it with a razor until it heals.
But if the prominence of the tear duct flesh harms the eye greatly, suspend it with a hook and cut out a part of it: and do not finish the incision so that the course of the tears does not occur.
Then distill into the tear duct red ochre or powder made from alum until it heals.
On the incision of the Alguardenic and flesh born in the eye.
Chapter 17.
Sometimes red flesh grows in the eyes of some men, superimposed or placed on top until it covers the pupil, or approaches it, or constricts upon the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelids outward; and it resembles a rose balustrade.
And the operation on it is also such that the sick person should place their head in your lap. Then open their eyes and gather all that flesh with suitable hooks; and hold it with one forceps or hand.
Then cut the flesh first, until all of it is finished with a scalpel. And be careful from the eye so that you do not injure it during the operation; and let your incision be with which you cut it, or with a spathe, as we have described in the incision of a nail; or with small forceps with which asebel is collected, according to the shape that will come after this chapter.
When therefore your incision is completed and all of the albuginea is removed, then fill the eye with crushed salt; or distill into it red powder and those similar to it from corrosive medicines; and place on the eye outside cotton wool with white lead: so that it is secured from a hot abscess.
But if anything remains from the albuginea, and hot blood prevails over you, and you fear a hot abscess; then leave the eye, and treat it with that which calms an abscess.
Then repeat upon it with the operation until it is healed.
And do similarly with added flesh which occurs in the eye from this kind.
However it is necessary that others treat the care of all weak eyes from a natural or accidental way by operating with iron; and do not insert your hand into any of these operations until you see that that member tolerates that operation.
On the Gathering of Pterygium from the Eye.
Chapter 18.
Pterygium is reddish veins which are woven over the eye and prevent vision from its operation; and weaken the eye with the length of days.
It is therefore necessary for you first to consider if the eye in which there is pterygium is strong and if there is no illness in it except for the pterygium; then gather its pterygium.
And it is, that you order the sick person to put his head on your lap.
Then suspend those good things with one hook, or two according to your prudence; and let the hook be subtle, of a doubling, according to this form, or let there be two hooks graded in one body, according to this form.
Then gather with subtle forceps those veins with subtlety, and wipe away the blood hour by hour, until you see those veins remove from the eye, and they are resolved; and beware lest you injure the eye with the extremities of the speculum.
And let your operation be in the middle of the day before the sun, and be firm in your operation very much: so that you do not fall except upon those veins.
And when you have finished, then distill into the eye green vitriol, or red; so that with its sharpness it corrodes what remains from the rheum.
But if it is not possible for you to gather all of it in that hour, then plaster the eye with what soothes the pain of the eye; and leave it for several days, until its pain subsides: and guard against a warm poultice; then repeat upon it according to the same manner, until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps.
Concerning the reduction of arrisati to the nose.
Chapter Nineteen.
Physicians call arrisati a fistula, which you cure with a cautery, or with sharp burning medicine, according to what preceded its account.
And if it does not heal, then there is no skill in it except that you cleave upon the abscess at its nativity and extract all the moisture which is in it and the pus until the mouth is exposed.
When therefore the mouth is exposed, and you see in it corruption, or blackness, then extirpate it with an instrument, whose form is this.
And it is called Asperi of the head.
Let it be made of tempered iron, and let its head be round like an awl, which shall be punctured with the puncture of a file, or the puncture of a fine aliskilfer; and place it upon the corrupted place of the bone.
Then revolve it between your fingers, and press your hand upon it a little while, until you know that corruption is already planed; and do that several times.
Then restore the place with drying astringent medications.
And if the place is consolidated and flesh arises in it, and the course of blood is cut off; and it remains for forty days and does not renew and does not fester and no incident occurs in it: then know that it has already been healed.
And if not, there is no remedy in it except to reduce the fistula to the nostril, according to this form.
And it is to uncover the second bone with iron or with a sharp medicine; and when the bone has been uncovered, then take an auger according to this form, let its iron end be triangular: and let its wood be a pyramid thinned down to the extremity, as you see.
Then place that upon the bone itself; and let it be near the lacrimal; and extend your hand a little from the eye. Then revolve your hand with the auger until it penetrates the bone, and feels it weak; through this it finds wind coming out of it, when it holds its hand over its nose.
Therefore then restore the place with astringent drying medications as I taught you.
When flesh arises and the place hardens, then the matter which was flowing outwards returns to the nose; therefore it is lighter upon the weak one.
On the Reduction of an Eye Prominence
Chapter 20.
When the eye protrudes with all its entirety, and there is neither injury nor diminution in vision; then it is necessary that you loosen what is weak; afterwards phlebotomize him; afterward place cupping glasses on the neck without scarification, but with suction.
Afterwards place upon the eye a liniment which is made from acacia, and aloe, and olibanum, and sarcocolla. Afterwards bind the eye above with a plaster with many poultices.
And the manner of the poultices is: that you take many soft cloths, and double every cloth from them over four; make many from them; then place them one upon another, according to the amount which the eye needs; then bind above them with a hard cloth with strong binding.
And repeat cupping glasses with suction without scarification.
Then remove the cupping glasses, and let the eye be bound day and night.
But if the bandage again becomes soft, then it is necessary that it be bound tightly; then remove the bandage after a day and night, as we have said.
If therefore you see the eye already having returned to its tunic, it is good; and if not, then repeat the plaster, and poultices, and binding, and cupping glasses until it is healed.
Concerning the incision of the tunic.
Chapter Twenty-One.
When a rupture occurs in the tunic of the eye, and then it protrudes and proceeds outside the eyelids like a grain of the eye, and the form of man is spoiled because of that, and vision enters into it: then the operation on it is as follows, according to what I narrate; and it is, that you insert a needle into the root of the eye from the lower to the upper part.
Then insert another needle in which there is double thread from the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate; and let the first needle go according to its disposition.
Then cut the place with a double-edged knife and tie it to the part you want to take out with thread around the point of a needle: and tighten it very much.
Then take out the needle and place on the eye wool steeped in the white of an egg: and leave it until the thread falls with the part you want to take out.
Then care for the eye with what strengthens it until the wound is healed.
And sometimes the part is compressed from every side with a circle of cloth, until the eye gains great prominence.
Then pierce it with a fine lancet, which reaches the depth of the eye, and let the white moisture run out, and let the eye descend and enter immediately: then tighten it until it is healed.
On the treatment of Alcomnatia.
Chapter XXII.
This disease which is called Alcomnatia is nothing but a humor that gathers in the eye, like descending water and it is not itself.
And the way to operate on it is to have the sick person sit on a prepared seat, or straight.
Then take his head with your hands from both sides and move it until you see the humor reach the lower parts of your eyes. Then fix it so that it does not descend and illuminate the light: and let the sick person see things as they saw them: and if it does not descend below, you know that it is water.
But if the descent of the humor is not prepared with what we have said, then make the sick person sit between your hands. Then take a fine lancet and pierce above the corneal membrane a little at the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tunic, until the humor comes out.
Therefore when it comes out, then distill into the eye warm water in which you mixed honey: or water in which you already boiled fenugreek and honey: then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
Concerning the treatment of water descending into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter XXIII.
We have already spoken of the kinds of water in division, and what is suitable for perforating by speech declaring and expounding, then take that same according to health.
Then it is necessary that you make the weak person sit between your hands square, opposite the light, near the sun; and bind his sound eye, and constrict him strongly; then pull down the eyelid of his eye with your right hand, if the eye in which there is water, is the left eye; or with your left hand, if the eye is the right.
Then take an almond with your right hand, if the eye is the left; or with your left hand, if the eye is the right.
Then place the extremity of the almond near the cornea for the thickness of a ray in the very whiteness of the eye apparent to the lachrymal minor; then press the almond with force; and you revolve with it your hand, until it penetrates into the albuginea of the eye; and feel that the almond has now reached the empty thing.
And it is necessary that the measure of the journey of the almond to the depth be the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of blackness; and this is the cornea of the eye. For you will see it in the very pupil by vision of the eye, because of the clarity of the tunic of the cornea.
Then place the almond up to the place in which there is water. Then press it down below with juice one after another.
If therefore the water descends immediately, then the weak person sees that above which he opens his sight immediately, and the almond in his eye.
Then rest a little. If therefore the water descends, then lay it aside second, beyond which the almond goes forth.
Therefore when it is fixed and does not rise: then extract the almond with ease: and you turn your hand gradually.
Then dissolve something from clear salt of gems in water: and bathe the eye inside with it. Then place an entire cotton plug, or wool soaked in rose oil, and egg white over the eye: and bind it with the healthy eye.
We however, and those who are of our time, place ground cinnamon with egg white over it.
But if the almond does not obey you to enter the eye because of its hardness, since it is from a man whose eye is very hard: then it is necessary that you take an instrument, which is called Alberid, which has this shape.
Therefore perforate only the conjunctiva with it, and do not insert your hand into the hole: and it is only so that you make a way for the almond to a subtle place.
Then introduce the almond, as we have said.
And at the completion of your work, prepare a decently made bedroom for the weak one, in which he sleeps on his back in a darkened house: and prohibit him from all movements, and coughing: and place his food that which soothes his nature: and let him not move his head to the right, nor to the left at all.
And let the bandage be according to its arrangement until the third day.
Then loosen it in that darkened house and you will want to test his sight: and make him see things. Then reduce the bandage until the seventh day.
And it is not necessary that he do this at the hour of healing, or immediately after the incision: rather it must be done by others: because water rises quickly through a strong gaze.
But if a hot abscess occurs: then it is necessary to loosen the eye before the seventh day: and correct it with that which soothes the abscess until it is soothed: then restore his sight, and place an oral remedy upon his face by which his vision is regulated under it for several days, himself existing in that darkened house.
Then let him go out of the house gradually, and walk about in his own rooms.
And know that in surgery a student is not excused from watching many times; then let him dare to operate.
And indeed there has come to us a certain one of those who are from Alacrech, who said that there was made in Alacrech a well perforated, by which water is drawn up.
But therefore I have not seen anyone in your land who has done that; nor have I read it in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that it is new.
And these are the forms of species from a well, so that he who does not know them may stand upon it.
Let them be made of bronze properly; and let the extremities of them be triangular with the same subtlety, and the extremity pointed.
Chapter XXIV.
On the care of flesh born on the nose.
Sometimes there are born in the nose various added fleshes, from which there is something that resembles a scorpion of many feet; and from it is cancerous flesh, stony, of a dark color; and from it is that which is soft flesh, not of a dark color.
Therefore, in that which is of these fleshes soft, not deceitful, nor cancerous, it is necessary that you make him sit weak between your hands opposite the sun, and open his nostrils, and project a hook into those fleshes: then draw them outwards, and cut what you have grasped from them with a fine sharp scalpel on one side, until you know that all the flesh has already been removed.
But if there should remain something of it whose incision is not possible: then scrape that with one of the subtle instruments easily, until nothing remains of it. But if blood should overpower you, or a hot abscess should occur: then oppose to it what is necessary: or if it is from malignant abscesses, then hurry in cauterizing it until the blood is cut off, and all the flesh is removed.
Then vinegar and water, or wine, should be poured into the nose after the incision. But if the nose opens and moisture proceeds from it as far as the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that there is flesh grown within it upon the upper bones of the nose, to which the instrument did not reach with the incision.
Then it is necessary that you insert a linen thread which has a certain thickness and many knots in it, placing a finger's breadth or less between each knot; and  you must guide the feeble-minded man so he inserts one end of the thread into his nose with a reed, or whatever else is possible for him after he has made it like an awl; and he draws out his own scent until it reaches the palate, and exits over his throat.
And indeed they often do this very thing to young boys in schools; and it is an easy matter for him who wishes to do so.
Then place the two ends of the thread, one end which exits above the nose and the other which remains in the nose. Then apply a flesh-hook with the knots on the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh is already caught with the knots of the thread.
Then pull out the thread; and after washing away the blood, place licorice which you have steeped in Egyptian ointment into the nose. Do this for three days or more, until the ointment eats away all that remains of the flesh.
Finally, at the end of the treatment, place a lead tube into the nose for several days until it heals.
But if it needs drier care, use that.
To make a head-plunger with which oils and other medicines are distilled into the nose, make it from silver or bronze; let it be like a small lamp, open like a scallop shell, and its passageway similar.
And if you wish to make a closed cannula, like a reed.
And the shell of the instrument for making a head bandage should be full, open; to which there should be a handle at its end, with which you hold it when you heat oil or whatever you wish from juices and flowing things in it.
Chapter XXV.
Very often a swelling arises at the end of the nose, and it magnifies and increases with the days until its appearance is foul.
And therefore it is necessary that you cut into it at the beginning of its appearance and eradicate all of it. Then place either a cautery or a burning medicine on the spot which takes its place.
But if the incision is delayed until it magnifies, then consider, if it is stony, hard, dark colored, and has little feeling: then do not touch it with iron; for it is a cancerous swelling.
For I have often seen those who cut into such a swelling, and great harm befell him who had it.
And if the swelling is soft to the touch, not dark-colored, and you see that incision is possible throughout all of it, then evacuate the weak part and cut into it without fear, without dread; and care for the spot with something that dries and constricts until it is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
Concerning the suturing of the nose, lip, and ear.
Know that when a break in continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, little benefit results from an operation except in some individuals.
Therefore, when it happens to someone that they have one of these injuries, you must consider if it is a recent wound with its own blood; then join the two lips of the wound with suture; then care for it until it is healed.
And if the continuity of the solution has already been separated at its lips and each part has become healthy, then it is necessary to flay all the parts from their own apparent skin until it bleeds. Then join the two lips with suture and tighten them, and sprinkle dragon's blood and ground frankincense upon it; and place upon the powders a piece of diaphanicon plaster and some other of the consolidating plasters; and leave it bound for two days or three. Then unbind it and change the medicine; and leave it until the threads fall away by themselves. Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
The method of suture is to join the continuity of the solution either with needles as we have described in suturing the abdomen or to join the solution with thread as I have taught you.
Chapter 27
On the Extraction of Nodes from the Lips
Many people indeed have hard boils resembling grains of herb, often in the inner parts of their lips; and some of these are smaller, and others larger.
Therefore it is necessary to turn the lip and cut upon each node of it, and to hang it with a hook, and to cut into it from every side.
Then fill the place after cutting with ground terebinth until the blood is stopped.
Then wash it with vinegar and care for the place with it, because of its astringency, until the wounds are healed.
Chapter 28
On the Incision of Flesh Born Upon the Gum.
Very often flesh grows upon the gum, which the ancients call abuluss
Therefore it is necessary that you hang it with a hook or hold it with forceps and cut into it at its root, and let the serum or blood flow.
Then place on the spot ground saw dust, or other astringent drying powders.
But if that flesh returns after healing, for it often does, then cut it a second time and cauterize it; for it will not return after cautery.
Chapter XXIX.
On the reason of Teeth with Iron.
Sometimes crusts rough and unsightly gather on the surfaces of teeth, both inner and outer, and sometimes they become blackened and turn yellow, and green, until corruption from them reaches the gum, and the teeth become foul through it.
It is therefore necessary for you to make the weak person sit between your hands, and place his head in your lap, and scrape the tooth with a millstone, in which crusts appear to you like sand; until nothing remains of them, and do likewise with blackness, greenness, yellowness and others until they are clean.
Therefore if what is in them from the beginning of the reason is removed it is good; and if not then repeat the reasoning on them another day, a second and third until finally you achieve your aim in that which you desire.
And know that a tooth needs razors of various shapes and many figures according to what is prepared for your operation; therefore the razor with which the tooth is scraped from the lower part is different from the razor with which it is scraped between the teeth, according to other forms.
And these shapes of razors should be prepared by you, as you see them.
Chapter XXX.
On the Extraction of Toothache.
It is necessary for you to cure the tooth from its pain with all your skill, and delay in its extraction. For there is nothing to replace it when it is extracted; because it is a noble substance: until there is no excuse for its extraction, then it is necessary when the weak person is compelled to extract it, that you strengthen and assure yourself of the aching tooth.
Very often pain deceives the sick person and he thinks it is in a strong tooth and extracts it; then the pain does not go away until the weak tooth is extracted.
For we have already seen that from the operation of those who cut veins.
Therefore when a tooth that is aching itself is shown to you, it is necessary that you make incisions around the tooth with a scalpel, in which there is some strength, until the gum is loosened from every part: then move it yourself with your fingers, or with delicate forceps at first gradually, until you shake it.
Then place large forceps in it with a good hold, and the head of the weak tooth between your knees: which you have now held well so that it does not move: then pull the tooth according to straightness so as not to break it.
But if it does not come out, then take one of those instruments and insert it under it from every side with ease, and try its motion as you did at first.
But if the tooth is perforated or corroded, then it is necessary that you fill that hole with cloth and tie it with the end of a thin ray, so that it does not break in the hour of your constriction upon it with forceps.
And it is necessary that you act with much care in the incision around the gum from every side.
And guard your strength so that you do not break it and a part of it remains, and returns upon the weak one from that evil which is greater than its first pain.
And beware lest you do what ignorant phlebotomists do in their haste and boldness concerning its eradication beyond what we have related.
For very often they cause great infirmities to happen upon men, which are more difficult to break and the roots of it all remain or some of them, or that they extract it with some bones of the jawbone, as we have testified many times.
Then after its removal it should be washed with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
If it should happen that there is a flow of blood from the places (for this often happens) then apply something from zedoary and fill the place with it: and if not, cauterize it if you do not have zedoary.
The shape of the forceps which moves a tooth shall first be of long shanks, short handles, thick, so that they do not bend when pressed upon the tooth: let them be as you see with thick handles so that when you squeeze them they do not give way nor double: of short shanks and made of good iron or of well-made steel, straight shanks; and at their ends shall be teeth, some which enter others and constrict with a proper force.
And sometimes the ends are made like the beak of a bird which is called a stork and they are of strong constriction.
Chapter Thirty-One.
On the removal of teeth, and the extraction of fractured bones of the jaw.
When there remains something broken at the removal of a tooth then it is necessary to put a poultice with butter upon the place for one or two days until the place is softened; then introduce an elevator, or forceps into it, whose ends are assimilated to the beak of a bird which is called a stork. This is the shape of these forceps.
Let their ends be made like a file inside: or like a small sickle.
But if it does not yield to you with these forceps then you must carefully cut the flesh over the root and insert an instrument called a small lever, whose shape is this:
Let it have a short shank, slightly thick, and let it not be wet so that it does not break.
If therefore the root comes out through this, it is good; and if not, you must help with these other instruments whose shapes are these.
The shape of the first triangular extremity, in which there is a certain thickness.
The shape of the subtle triangular extremity.
And with other instruments and tools which preceded in the matter of teeth.
It should also be joined with this instrument which is assimilated to a large hook, of this form, a twisted triangular extremity, in which there is a certain thickness so that it does not break, and let it not be imbibed.
And know that dental instruments are many, and likewise the remaining instruments are not counted, and a prudent artisan, subtle in his art, finds an instrument for himself according to what the operation and illnesses themselves signify to him.
Because from illnesses there are those to which the ancients did not say an instrument, on account of the diversity of their species.
But if the jawbone breaks from the mandible or from other bones of the mouth, or it rots: then carefully examine it in its place with what suits it from instruments and forceps which I said in the extraction of roots, and join it with a gesture, which has this form.
Let it have a certain gradual thickness so that it is strung or held with the bone and does not flee and wander until the bone comes out; and restore the place with appropriate medicines for that.
But if there is a small putrefaction in the bone, then scrape it from its putrefaction and care for it until it heals.
Chapter Thirty-Two.
Of the Locking of Teeth Prominent Above Others.
When teeth protrude not according to their natural course, it becomes ugly by that: and especially when it happens in women, and girls, namely, those of marriageable age.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to consider. If a tooth arises after another and is not positioned, or it is possible to file it down, but the tooth cannot be filed: then eradicate it. And if it is joined with another tooth, then cut it out with this instrument, which has this shape.
It is like a small beak and is made of hard iron, with a very sharp point.
Let your incision be such that you cut it over many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, so that another is not moved from the teeth.
But if it is prominent and exposed for filing: then file it with a file of hard iron, which has this shape.
Let it be entirely of iron, and its handle of very small points, like the file with which needles are made: with which the tooth should be filed gradually over many days with ease, so that the tooth is not moved and falls out; then smooth it, and finally eradicate it with certain razors.
But if there is a tooth from which a part breaks off and injures the tongue: then it is necessary that you file it also until the roughness of that fracture is removed and it is made even; and smoothed so that it does not injure the tongue nor corrupt speech.
Chapter Thirty-Three.
Concerning the Retention of Teeth with Gold Wires.
When the front teeth suffer a concussion and jolting from a blow or fall, and the infirm person cannot bite down on it so that it does not come loose; and you have treated them with astringent medicines, but the treatment has not been effective: then there is a plan to bind them with a gold wire, because silver turns green and rots after a few days, but gold never changes.
And let the wire be medium in subtlety and thickness according to the amount that fits between the teeth.
And the form of retention indeed is, that you take a wire and insert a double length of it between two healthy teeth; then weave with the two ends of the wire among the loose teeth, whether there is one or more, until you reach with the wire to a healthy tooth on the other side. Then repeat the texture up to the part from which you began; and tighten your hand with subtlety and wisdom, until it is completely removed; and let your constriction where you are stringing the thread be at the roots of the teeth, so that it does not come loose.
Then cut off the superfluous ends of the thread with forceps; and join both, and turn them over with your hand; and conceal them between a healthy tooth and a moved tooth, so that it does not injure the tongue; then let it remain thus tightened.
But if they become loosened, or broken, tighten them with another thread, and it will stand thus for the whole time.
And this is the form of Teeth, and the figure of the retention of two sound teeth, and two moved teeth, as you see.
And sometimes it happens that one tooth, or two return after falling out and into their places, and are retained as we have described, and remain; and this is not done except by a craftsman, prudent, and experienced.
And sometimes one of the vaccine bones is adapted; and it is made into the shape of a tooth, and placed in its place, from which the tooth is fortified and tightened, as we said; and it remains, and is used with it for a long time.
Chapter Thirty-Four.
Sometimes this ligament that occurs under the tongue is either natural, with which a man is born, or accidental, from a wound that has already consolidated.
And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the infirm one in his head in your lap, and raise his tongue; then cut that nervous ligament across its width, until the tongue is loosened from its restraint.
But if there is something hard and knotty in it, and it is from the consolidation of a wound; then project a hook into it, and pierce it across its width, until you strike the ligament, and the knot is loosened.
And take care that there is not a fissure into the depth of the flesh, and you cut an artery there, and bleeding should occur.
Then it should be washed in the trace of the incision with rose water, or vinegar, or cold water.
Then place under the tongue a ligature from linen, which the weak person should hold in every night so that it does not become consolidated on the second day.
But if bleeding should occur, then place over the spot boiled zedoary. But if blood overcomes you, then cauterize the place with a lenticular cautery, which is suitable for that; then care for it with the remaining care until it heals.
Chapter Thirty-Five.
Sometimes it happens that under the tongue there occurs a swelling which is similar to a small frog, preventing the tongue from its natural operation; and perhaps it grows so much that it fills the mouth.
And the operation on it is that you open the weak person's mouth before the sun, and consider the swelling.
If therefore you see it of a dark color, or black, hard, to which the weak person does not find sensation; then do not touch it, because it is cancer.
And if it is inclined towards whiteness, in which there is moisture; then project into it a hook, and cut it with a fine scalpel, and free it from every part. And if blood overcomes you in the hour of your operation, then place over it boiled zedoary until the blood is cut off; then return to your operation until you extract it with all its complement.
Then wash it with vinegar and salt; and care for it with the remaining suitable care for that until it heals.
On the Care of a Swelling of Two Tonsils.
Chapter Thirty-Six.
Sometimes there occur between the throat glands, which resemble almonds, that protrude outward; and they are called two tonsils: when you treat these as we have said in the division, and they do not heal, then consider.
Therefore if it is a hard abscess, dark in color, with little sensation: then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is reddish in color, and its root is thick: then do not touch it even with iron, fearing a flow of blood, but rather let it alone until it matures. And then either you will pierce it, or it will break open on its own.
And if it is white in color, round, and its root is slender: then it is necessary to cut into it.
And the operation on it is, that you consider before your operation whether its hot abscess has quieted with rest completely, or diminishes somewhat: then therefore make the sick person sit before the sun, and let his head be in your lap; and open his mouth, and let a servant receive between his hands, and press his tongue down with an instrument, which has this shape.
Let it be made of silver, or bronze, that is thin like a knife.
When therefore you press with it the tongue, and the abscess is shown to you, and your sight falls upon it: then take a hook, and fix it in the tonsil, and draw it outward as much as you can, besides that you pull out with it some of the tunics.
Then cut into it with an instrument which has this following shape. It resembles forceps: but nevertheless let its points be curved, so that the opening of each one is in a straight line with the other acutely; therefore take care that it be made of tempered iron, or aluminum imbued.
But if this instrument is not present, then cut into it with a scalpel, which has this shape. Let it be sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And after you have cut one amygdala, cut the other according to this same kind of incision.
Then after the incision, let the patient gargle with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
But if there should happen to him a flow of blood, let him gargle with water in which pomegranate rinds have been boiled, or myrtle leaves and those like them from astringents, until the flow of blood is stopped; then care for him until he is healed.
And sometimes other abscesses arise in the throat besides the two amygdales. Therefore cut them according to what I said in the incision of the two amygdales equally.
And I myself have already treated a woman for an abscess that had arisen between her throat, which was dragging it to suffocation, with few senses, because it had almost closed the throat; and the woman was breathing from a narrow passage, and had already forbidden her both food and drink of water; and she had already come to death if she had remained one day or two days.
And the abscess had risen so much that it had sent out two branches until they had gone out above the two nostrils.
Therefore I hurried quickly and fixed a hook into one of them. Then I drew it out, and a large portion was drawn from it.
Then I cut it where I grasped it from the nostril.
Then I did that same thing to her from the other nostril.
Then I opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; and afterward I fixed a hook into the abscess itself; then I cut off a part of it, and there did not flow from it except for a little blood. Therefore the woman's throat was completely opened, and she immediately began to drink water, and then took food.
Therefore I did not cease to cut from that abscess many times over a long period; and the abscess would succeed in the place where I was cutting, until it was prolonged excessively and came out with her.
Therefore I ingeniously cauterized the abscess between the throat.
So it remained from addition; then I walked away, and I did not know what God did with it after me.
On the incision of an abscess of the uvula.
Chapter Thirty-Seven.
When catarrh descends to the uvula and becomes abscessed and is long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the lower part thick, round, then it is called a uva.
When it is treated with what we said in the division, and the treatment does not avail; and you see that the hot abscess has subsided from it, and it is subtle: then it is necessary that you incise it.
And that which is gathered round from it, and there is no length to it, and it is bloody, or dusky colored, or black, and there is no sensation to it: then it is necessary that you avoid the incision of it. For in this there is fear over the weak one.
Therefore it is necessary when you see it according to the manner which I said from its whiteness and length, that you make the weak one sit before the sun; and press their tongue with an instrument of which narration preceded: then fix a hook in the uvula and draw it downward: and incise it with one of two instruments which I said in the incision of two tonsils.
And it is necessary that you not incise from it except what is added beyond the natural limit without addition.
For if you incise from it more, you injure the voice and speech.
Then after the incision use what we narrated in the incision of two tonsils; and care for it until it heals.
But if the weak one is terrified from the incision, then it is necessary that you use ingenuity in its cauterization without fear and dread.
And the manner of cautery in this is not except with sharp water; and it is, that you place the head of the weak one in your lap. Then press his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned. Then take from the water which I told you in the chapter on cauterization and mix it with a calx that has not been extinguished and make it neither thick nor thin and fill the cavity of this instrument, which has this shape.
Let the extremity in which the medicine is placed have a cavity like the cavity of a ray's ear.
And place the instrument with the medicine on his tongue; and let the sick person lie on his side so that saliva runs from his mouth from within the medicine, so that nothing descends from it to his throat and harms him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And you from the first place it on his tongue for half an hour, until you see it already blackened and the bite of the medicine subdued.
And if you wish to take cotton and wrap it around the extremity of the ray and infuse the cotton with the medicine and insert the ray with the cotton into the cannula from above until the cotton adheres to the tongue.
Do that many times until you achieve what you desire from the cauterization of the vein. Then let it go; for it will dry up and fall off after three or four days.
And if it is necessary for you to iterate the medicine, iterate it; and after cauterization cleanse around the vein with cotton steeped in butter, and purify what is around it from the medicine; and wash with cold water.
And let it be treated externally with embrocations, and internally with gargles until it is healed.
This therefore is a healthier kind of treatment than incision and further from fear.
And sometimes the tongue is also cured with something more subtle than cautery and incision; for it is cured with fumigation according to this method. Take calamint, and hyssop, and origanum, and rue, and sage, and chamomile, and abrotanum, and herbs like these; and put them all together, or some of them in a pot, and submerge them with vinegar, and let them boil; and the pot should be smeared with clay neatly; and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot, above which an instrument concave is to be placed according to this manner.
Let it be made of silver, or bronze; and insert the extremity, in which there is a pomegranate seed, into the mouth of the sick person, until the vapor rises to the uvula above the cannula, until the uvula is darkened much.
Then repeat over it many times, until it dries up.
And beware, lest you do this treatment at the beginning of the arrival of an abscess. For it most often adds to the abscess; and it is not necessary for you to do that except at the decline of its heat.
But if this instrument is not present to you, then take a cannula, and compose bark of the fig tree in its extremity; so that the mouth of the sick person is not burned; for the bark of the fig tree prevents the vapor from burning the mouth; and this is from good treatment with safety.
On the Extraction of Thorns, and Bones from the Throat.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Often a bone, or a fishbone, or something else adheres in the throat.
Therefore it is necessary for you to extract what of them appears above which the sight falls upon, after you press the tongue with an instrument toward the sun, and it is made clear to you what is in the throat.
And what does not appear to you and is concealed in the throat, it is necessary for you to make the sick person vomit before food is digested in the stomach. For perhaps the attached thing will go out through vomiting.
Either the weak person swallows a piece of turnip or a lettuce root or he swallows a mouthful of dry bread; or he takes a piece of dried sea sponge which is soft and ties it on a thread, then swallows it. And when therefore it reaches the place where the spines or bone are, and is drawn out, then it comes out.
If therefore it does not come out with what we have said, then use an instrument of lead according to this form.
Let it be thicker than the radius a little and let there be a curve at its extremity which it introduces into his throat with ease; and let he himself have his head elevated upward.
And let him beware of touching his epiglottis so that he does not have a coughing fit and he pushes with it the mouth or the spine or the doctor introduces it himself with his hand.
But what the weak person introduces is better because of his knowledge of the place of the thing attached and he pushes it down or pulls his hand up with the instrument all the way according to the quantity prepared for him until it comes out.
On the Extraction of a Leech.
Chapter XXXIX.
When a leech is applied with what I said in the division on treatment with medicines and it does not detach itself then consider in the throat of the weak person in front of the sun or by the sun after you have pressed his tongue with the instrument which I related to you.
If therefore your sight falls upon the leech extract it with a small hook or with delicate forceps carefully.
And if it is not possible to do so with them then take a concave tube and introduce it into the throat of the weak person up to near the throat; then introduce into the concavity of the tube iron heated with fire. Do that many times and let the weak person abstain from all water for the whole day.
Then he should take a cup full of cold water and open his mouth in it; and gargle with it, but not swallow anything from it; and stir the water with his hand one hour after another. For the leech immediately falls when it feels the water.
But if it does not come out with what we have described, then fumigate the weak one with bugs, or with asafoetida with the instrument which I have described in the fumigation of the uvula.
Do that many times, for it will fall by itself.
And the method of operation in fumigation is that you should take a jar, in which there are live plums with fire; and let the jar be covered with a lid, in the middle of which there is a hole; and let the end of the instrument be placed in that hole.
Then direct the fumigation, and let the weak one place his mouth at the end of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the fumigation does not escape until you know that the fumigation has already reached the leech. For the leech immediately falls.
But if it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation many times.
And let the weak one endure thirst, and eat salt, and garlic, and not drink water.
Therefore it is necessary that he comes out with this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the leech is extracted from the throat when it falls on top of the vision.
It is similar to forceps, as you see: except that it has this curve which is inserted into the throat. And its end is similar to the beak of a bird which is called a stork, in which there is roughness like a file; when it grasps something, it does not let go of it at all.
On the opening of abscesses, and their incision, and care in general.
Chapter 40.
There are many kinds of abscesses, of many types, according to how we remember them, namely one, and one in this book; and they are different in their perforation and incision in two ways.
One of which is from the type of abscess itself, and because it consists of humors.
And the second way is because of the places where they occur in the body.
For an abscess occurring on the head is different from an abscess occurring in the anus; and an abscess occurring in a fleshy place is different from an abscess occurring in the joints; and each of them has its own judgment according to its operation.
And of abscesses, there are some which ought not to be perforated except after the ripening of blood in them and its completion; and of these, there are some which ought to be perforated while they are raw and do not ripen according to their completion.
Such as abscesses which are near the joints.
For when an abscess occurs near a joint and is prolonged to be its own, until it putrifies what is around it, perhaps the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted; therefore, it is the cause of closer contraction of that limb.
Or there is an abscess at a principal limb; for if you delay its perforation until it ripens, it will harm either that or the principal limb through it.
Or it is near the anus, therefore perforate it while immature; and you ought not to perforate a raw abscess, not of complete digestion, except that which is near the anus, lest it putrefy deeply and extend to the interior parts of the anus and become a fistula, or becomes incurable at its end.
You ought to know the hour of perforating an abscess which has ripened according to its completion; and it is at sedation of pain, recession of fever, and diminution of redness, and throbbing, and sharpness of the head of the abscess; and the other signs.
And it is necessary that you make the same perforation in the lower place of the abscess, and of the more prominent eminence; and let the perforation be directed in length of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands and feet, and places of tendons, and cords, and nerves, and arteries, and finally in all equal places where there is no reflection.
In those which are reflected, proceed with the perforation according to that member.
But when an abscess is in fleshy places: then it is better that you leave its perforation alone until its digestion is confirmed, as we said according to the complement.
For if you pierce it before that, the course of the virus is prolonged from it, and there is much filth and foulness, and perhaps the lips of it will become hardened, and its depth.
And certain abscesses are perforated according to the width of the body as needed: or according to that which the member requires.
And it is necessary that you administer a small perforation in small abscesses, and a large perforation in large abscesses: or many incisions through similarity of the size of the abscess.
And there are abscesses from which it is necessary that the skin be concave: and it is cut when already made like cloth, and made at the end, which already is dead: such as happens in many, like a hernia, and buboes.
And from those are those which are cut with an incision having three angles. And from those is one from which it is cut like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
Like an abscess of the groin.
And from those are those in which a round incision and a crescent incision are administered: and similar to those from incisions.
But that which does not have a head, such as soft, superficial abscesses, it is necessary that you pierce it with a superficial perforation, or only a flat one.
And it is necessary, when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, and you pierce it, that you do not hurry and draw out all the pus at that time; rather, draw out a part of it. Then stitch up the abscess until another day. Then again draw out some pus.
Do this many times according to the degree until it comes out; especially if the patient is weak of body, or a pregnant woman, or a young child, or an old man: for the animal spirit is often resolved with the exit of pus; and perhaps the patient dies, and you do not perceive.
Therefore be very careful in this chapter.
And after you pierce it by which you pierce these abscesses, it is necessary that you wash the wound and consider. And if therefore the wound of the abscess is small, or the incision is flat, then apply a bandage from linen, or old cotton. And if the abscess is large, and there are many fissures from the perforation, it is necessary then that you insert into every fissure a bandage until they reach one another.
And if you have cut off a part of the skin in the abscess, or hollowed it around: then it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton, or as when cloth is woven, or shaved with linen fluff without moisture; and tighten it until the third day.
Then throw it off, and care for it with what is necessary from ointment until it heals.
But if bleeding should occur during the hour of your operation, then apply cold water and vinegar, after a cloth is soaked in them; and place it upon the place of bleeding many times.
But if the bleeding persists, then it is necessary that you administer treatment and care, and powders, which I have related in many places of this book of ours, and by division.
If, however, it is wintertime and the place of the abscess is full of nerves, then you must pour warm broth with wine and oil upon it and place them over the area.
And if it is summertime and the areas are fleshy, then you must place compresses soaked in water and oil, or wine and oil, upon them entirely cold. Until the third day, as we have said, then you must open the abscess and cleanse it, and administer to its cure what is suitable for it until it is healed.
This, therefore, is all that is necessary from the knowledge of treating abscesses universally.
According to the path of distinction, I have already spoken about every abscess and how its cure is approached chapter by chapter individually.
Chapter 41.
On the incision of abscesses which occur on the skin of the head.
Small abscesses occur on the skin of the head, and they are of the kinds of nodules, which contain sheaths that are like sacks to them, as if they were poultices of hens.
And there are many kinds of them.
Some of them are fatty; some contain moisture like slime; some contain moisture like curds and pulps, and those similar; and some are hard and stony.
And in the incision of all of them and their extraction there is no fear, as long as an artery does not oppose during their incision.
And the operation in incising them is to test them with an instrument whose shape comes after this, which is called an Intromissum, until you know what it contains.
For if it is one that contains moisture, then dry it with a longitudinal incision, shallow in depth, according to this form.
And begin with an incision from line b to line g. When, therefore, the moisture is evacuated, then remove the skin that contains it and do not leave anything behind in it.
For it often returns if something remains from it.
Then immerse the dressing in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; and if not, in water and salt; and fill the wound with it, and leave it until another day. For it will corrode what remains from the cyst.
Then repeat the dressing on it with a second Egyptian ointment, and a third, and if it does not digest with that, until you are confident that nothing remains from the cyst, then heal the wound with ointment until it is cured.
But if the abscess contains a fatty node, then dry it according to this manner, with an incision in the shape of a cross; and insert hooks between the two lips of the incision, and flay it from every part; and exert your strength in extracting the tunic which contains it.
But if an artery opposes you, then do what I will tell you after.
And do likewise in a stony abscess, from an incision and the same treatment, according to what we have said.
And the incision over a stony abscess is easier; because it has little blood and moisture. And sometimes there are certain of these abscesses which are on the head in some people with which there is no moisture at all.
For it is this: because I cut on an abscess on the head of a young woman, and found the abscess like a solid and hard stone, rough, white, which could not be broken; and if anyone struck it with something throwing, he would wound himself.
But in other abscesses which happen on the head, except these abscesses which happen on children's heads, and at the roots of the ears, let the incision of all of them be a superficial one.
Or always make a perforation of them from their lower part so that the course of blood is relieved downwards.
Then care for it with what suits them from treatment.
On the Section of Strangulation in the Neck.
Chapter Forty-Two.
These swellings often occur in the neck, and under the armpits, and groins; and sometimes they occur in the rest of the body.
And regarding those which occur in the neck from them, they are one, and many; and they are generated from each other; and every swelling from them is within its own tunic, just as it is in knots and swellings of the head, as we have narrated.
And the kinds of these swellings are many. And of them indeed are stony ones; and of them are those which contain moisture; and of them are malignant ones, which do not obey treatment.
Therefore, in that which you see of them of good disposition to the touch, whose proximity to the color of the skin is manifest, and moves in every direction, and is not joined with the nerves of the neck, nor with the gullet, nor with the artery, and is not deep: it is necessary that you section it superficially from the upper part to the lower part of the body from line, b. to line, g.; and flay it from every side; and extend two lips of skin with a hook, or with many hooks if needed by it, as we have said in swellings of the head, and extract it gradually.
And it is for caution that a vein or nerve not be cut.
And let the scalpel not be very sharp so that it does not add to your hand with the incision, or disturb the sick person, and you cut what is not necessary.
But if you cut a vein or artery, or it prevents you from the operation, then place in the wound chewed oak, or certain powders which stanch blood, and constrict the wound, and leave it until the sharpness of the swelling subsides, and the wound softens: or until it begins and wants to putrefy.
For blood is severed by a tunic, therefore return to your operation until you finish it.
Then inquire with your index finger if anything remains from the small ligatures; therefore cut them and clean them.
But if there is a large vein in the root of the ligature then it is necessary that you do not cut that ligature from its root; rather it is necessary that you tie it with a strong doubled thread, and let it fall off by itself without harm.
Then fill the wound with old fat which you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment. Then take care of it yourself.
If the whole ligature is cut, then it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound and sew it up immediately after you see that there is absolutely no excess remaining.
But if you see that excess remains because of the size of the ligature then it is necessary for you to intend to cut its root and remove it; and administer the suture which we have described.
And that which the ligature contains of moisture, perforate it with a superficial perforation so that the place of its maturity appears to you and place the perforation from that which follows below the body as we have said.
Then administer after the perforation lint with ointment and the like so that it corrodes what remains from decay until when you see that the wound is already cleansed; then take care of it with a flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
Chapter 43.
On the incision of the epiglottis from an abscess within the throat by accident.
The ancients said this incision was made on the epiglottis and I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it; and this is the writing of their speech.
But in those who have synanche, it is necessary that the epiglottis be cut; since benefit is not made through it because all the veins and lungs are weak.
In those who have a hot apostema in the mouth, or throat, or both almonds, when there is no pain in the canal, it is necessary to use the section of the epiglottis, to avoid the destruction which arises from pre-speech.
Therefore, when we wish to do this, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis under three or four circles of the epiglottis, with a small incision across its width, in the space between two circles, so that the incision be made in flesh, not cartilage; and indeed this place is suitable for the incision because it is private of flesh, and blood vessels are distant from it.
But if the practitioner is timid, then it is necessary for him to extend the skin of the throat with a hook. Then he should grasp the skin until he reaches the canal; divert the blood vessels if he sees anything from them.
Then he should cut the flesh as we have described; and it is shown above the incision of the canal from phlegm that issues forth from it, with what is broken up, and cessation of voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
When therefore the hour arrives in which pre-speech is feared, bring together the two lips of the wound of the skin, and sew it alone without cartilage.
Then administer medicines that promote the growth of flesh until it heals.
Says Albucasis. The sum of this discourse which we have recounted is not explained except when they see that one of these apostemas has already coalesced the throat of the sick person; and he is raised up on the brink of death, and desires to interrupt his breathings: they go to cut the epiglottis so that the sick person may breathe upon the wound with a certain respiration and be saved from death; and for this reason they prescribed leaving the wound open until the malice of the sickness is consumed, and its malice is three days, and as if it were itself; then therefore they prescribed suturing the wound and taking care of it until it heals.
And what I myself have seen is that one maidservant took a knife and thrust it into her throat, and with it she struck part of the pulmonary canal.
And I was summoned to treat her, and I found her groaning, as is the groan of one dying.
I therefore examined the wound, and I found that little blood had come out from it. I was therefore perplexed, because she had not severed a vein, nor a sinew; and wind was escaping from the wound.
I hastened therefore and sewed up her wound, and I cared for it until it was healed; and nothing happened to the maidservant except hoarseness in her voice; and after a few days she returned to a better state of health.
Therefore I say from this: that there is no fear in the incision of the epiglottis.
On the incision of a hernia of the throat.
Chapter Forty-four.
This swelling called a hernia of the throat is a large swelling, according to the color of the body; and it is common in women.
And it occurs in two ways: either it is natural; or it is accidental.
In the natural kind, there certainly is no artifice.
The accidental kind, however, occurs in two ways, one of which is similar to fatty nodules. And the other way is similar to a swelling that arises from the knotting of an artery. And there is fear in this case and it should not be presumed to be incised with iron unless it is small; and you must examine it and investigate it with a probe. If therefore you find it similar to a fatty nodule and it is not suspended with any veins; then cut it out as nodules are cut; and extract it with what it contains from the cyst if it is in a cyst; and if it is not, then carefully examine all of it. Then care for the place with what is necessary for healing, until it heals.
Chapter Forty-Five.
On the Section of Kinds of Nodes.
There are many kinds of nodes, and I have already mentioned all their kinds in the division; and it is necessary that I tell here the difference between a node and an excrescence: since there is a doubt-causing one.
I say therefore that when there is an excrescence, there is heat and fever and violent pains until the boiling of the superfluity subsides and putrefaction is completed; then indeed the fevers and heat subside.
But with a node there is no heat, nor fever, nor pains, and it contains them in sacs sifachin, which is their own sac, and it is according to the color of the body: and the beginning of them is like a chickpea, and it becomes like a date stone, larger and smaller.
And they are according to two kinds: either fatty; or containing moisture. And the colors of the moisture are many, according to what I said in the division.
Therefore it is necessary that when you arrive at the treatment of a node, you should examine it and inquire into it first with an instrument called an intromissor, according to what its form will come to be in the chapter which is after this.
And the method of inquiry for abscesses and all nodes is to take this instrument and insert it into the damper place which you find in the abscess; and turn your fingers with it gradually until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the skin. Then finally measure your hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess.
Then draw out the intromissor and consider that which comes forth in its trace.
If therefore moisture flows out, whatever the color may be; then dry it with a superficial incision, according to what I said in the other abscesses.
And if the moisture does not flow out in the track of the Intromissi, then know that it is fat; therefore cut upon it a section in the shape of a cross, according to this form as I have taught you: and suspend it with hooks, and flay the skin from every part with ease; and keep a kistin if you can over it, so as to draw out the entire one healthy with a knot.
But if the kistin is broken at the operation and it is not possible to extract it whole, for this often happens, then draw it out in pieces until nothing remains of it.
For if a little or much of it remains, the Knot returns most often.
And if it overcomes you and a little remains from it: then fill the wound upon your completion with certain corrosive sharp powders; and constrict the wound and put upon it something that sits hot poultice, and care for it with the rest of the cure until it heals.
But if the Knot is large, then cut its two lips, and care for it as it incorporates.
But if a vein contrary to you pulsates or does not pulsate, then hurry and fill the place with triturated zegi, and leave it constricted for two days or three until the wound putrefies and the ebullition of blood subsides; then return to cutting what remains from the Knot.
Chapter XLVI.
Concerning external instruments for incision and perforation.
Of these are the forms of Intromissis and they are of three species.
For among them is a large one, and among them is a medium one, and among them is a small one.
Let them be made of sharp square-ended iron so they quickly enter the abscess.
And these are the forms of Experimenters, or rather, perforators, and one of them is called a beris, that is, a perforator, and they are of three species.
For from them there is a large one, a medium one, and a small one.
It is agreed that they should be investigated through them abscesses, and fistulas, and buboes from that which is between them of bones.
And others are made round, smooth, and polished, like large needles with which cushions are sewn, namely from citron, or from bronze, or iron, or silver.
And the best of them are those that are made from citron.
And experience is also made from black lead, which are suitable for experimenting with fistulas, whose concavity has reflections, so that they are reflected with their smoothness with those reflections.
And they are again of three kinds. Because from them are long ones, medium ones, and short ones, according to the amount of the width of the fistula and its tightness.
Form of Hooks, and they are of many kinds.
For from them are simple ones, namely those which have a single curve: and they are of three kinds as you see, Large, Medium, and Small.
And from them are blind hooks: and they are of three kinds.
And from them are hooks having two curves, and they are of three kinds: and from them are hooks having three curves, and they are of three kinds: and all these are necessary in their place.
And these are the forms of Knives, with which nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped: and they are of three kinds: because from them there is a large one, a medium one, and a small one.
Their tips with which the cutting is done are sharp, other tips are not sharp: and they are not put thus unless so that with them there is relief in the scraping of nodes when there is fear of cutting a vein or nerve: and so that the weak are healed through them and find a little tranquility from the burning they experience at the scraping of an abscess.
They are made of bronze, and they are similar to a razor, with which alcohol is made: and at the wide end there is a hidden spatulated point: and through it runs inwards, and outwards when you wish, as you see.
The spatulated forms which are concealed between the fingers at the perforation of abscesses: and the sick do not perceive them: and they are of three kinds, large, medium, and small.
Forms for drawing out wind with which the flow of blood is severed: and they are of three kinds, large, medium, and small.
Let them be made of bronze, or brass, round, to a length a little as you see: and let them be fine.
And it is necessary that these kinds of wind-drawing instruments be large and small with you: so that you may sever blood quickly when necessary, and then when medicine is not present to you.
However, do not use them in the cutting of blood in every place in the body, and do not use them except in fleshy places: such as the calves of the leg, and the hip, and the calves of the arms, and the breasts, and the belly, and the groin, and similar places to these, from the fleshy calves, moist.
And sometimes they are made into other small instruments similar to hazelnut shells, according to their shape: with which blood is cut off when it flows from the place of phlebotomy, or at an incision of a vein, or artery: and sometimes they are made round according to this shape.
Chapter 47.
On the treatment of the breasts of men which resemble the breasts of women.
Sometimes the nipples of certain men swell up during sleep (that is, when they begin to be excited in sleep) until they resemble women's breasts: and they remain fetid abscesses.
Therefore, whoever shuns that, must cut above the nipples with a lunar section, according to this form from line b to line g. Then remove all the fat and skin. Then fill the wound with flesh-colored medicine. Then join the two lips of the wound with suture and care for it until it heals.
But if the nipple descends downwards and softens because of its size, as happens to women: then it must be divided on its two upper sides with two similar lunar incisions, each of which is joined with the other at the ends of each, until there is a larger line containing the smaller one, according to this form from line b to line g. Then remove the skin that is between the two lips and take away the fat and administer what we said about suture and powders, which are necessary for healing, until it heals.
But if you cannot complete the incision as it ought to be made, because of the restlessness of the patient or because of bleeding: then it is necessary to fill the wound with cotton soaked in a corrosive ointment and leave it until it corrodes what remains of the fat. Then care for it until it heals.
On puncturing an abscess which occurs under the nipple.
Chapter XLVIII.
These abscesses which occur under the nipple are of a kind of hard Strophulus, which contains cysts and some that contain humors.
Therefore those which are of the kind that contain humors must be cut with a lunar incision according to this form from line b to line g. And when all that is in the abscess is evacuated as pus, then fill it with old cotton and leave it until the next day.
Then remove the cotton and treat it with a suitable ointment until it heals.
If the abscess is of the kind of knots called Strophulas, then split it open above it, as we said in the section on Strophulas equally.
But if the wound extends so as to discharge pus, then apply a cautery to it, according to what we said previously.
Chapter XLIX.
On the incision of an abscess which occurs because of an artery and vein.
When an artery is ruptured and the skin above it becomes consolidated, an abscess often results; similarly, a vein may also develop an abscess and swelling.
The signs by which it is recognized that an abscess and swelling are due to an artery or vein are these: when the abscess is due to an artery, it is long, aggregated deep within the body; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel as if there is a grating sensation.
And that which is due to a vein is round and evident on the surface of the body.
To make an incision on this abscess is an error, especially when it is under the armpits, groins, neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is very large. Therefore, it is necessary that its treatment be performed with fire, and what arises from them also at the extremities or in the head must be separated.
On that which arises from the swelling of an artery opening, make an incision in the skin along its length. Then open the incision with hooks, and then expose the artery; free it from its surrounding tissues until it is exposed.
Then insert a needle under it and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie off the artery with two threads in two places, according to what I taught you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples.
Then puncture the area between the two ligatures with a scalpel until all the blood in it has exited and the abscess is resolved.
Then apply a treatment that produces pus until the ligaments fall away; afterwards treat it with suitable ointments until it is healed.
If it is an abscess due to a vein being cut, then you must hold with your hand as much as possible from the abscess together with the skin. Then insert a needle under the place which you held with your hand and make it penetrate; and let there be in it a double thread until you draw it out from the other side. Then tie the abscess together with a good ligature, as I told you in regard to a ligature for a vein, from two parts with two ends of thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then insert another needle with another thread under the entire abscess at the needle incision; press and tighten your threads in four places.
Then cut the abscess in its middle until what is in it comes out; then incise the excess skin and let what is tied be released from it.
Then place upon it a poultice which you have soaked in wine and oil. Then apply a treatment made with lint and ointments until it is healed.
Chapter One.
Concerning an abscess which occurs from twisting of nerves.
Just as an abscess occurs in an artery and vein, similarly an abscess occurs in nerves; which happens to them by a blow or from excessive labor and the like; and it most often occurs in places of support, such as the heel, and in every place where joints are moved; and it is a serious abscess.
Its color resembles the rest of the body, and it is in many positions without pain; and when it is squeezed with force, a weak person feels a sensation similar to numbness.
And it is not a collected abscess deep within the body; rather, it is under the skin, and it moves to every part, and it does not extend forward or back.
Therefore, what is among them at the joints should not be invaded with iron. For perhaps contraction may occur.
But in that which is among them on the head, or on the forehead, find the skin with a spatula. If therefore there is a small abscess, then hold it with forceps, and cut it from the root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and flay it: then remove it, and bring the wound together with suture: and care for it until it heals.
Chapter LI.
Concerning the incision of an abscess, which occurs in the abdomen.
It happens to some men many times in their abdomens, and in the other bodies of theirs, boils, which are called fungal, by similarity of them with fungi.
Whose root is delicate, and their head is thick, and their lips are inverted. And some of them are small: and some of them grow very large.
And I indeed already saw a man, and in his abdomen were two boils, which were more similar to fungi than other things: there was no difference between them, white, small-rooted, and their lips were inverted, and they split open, and moisture always flowed from them.
I therefore cut into them, and found in the weight of one almost ten and eight ounces and in the other almost six ounces. And the operation in cutting them is that you consider then, if he is weak, moist, and the color of the boil is white, moist, delicate-rooted: then cut it with a broad spatula, and have a cautery in your presence in fire.
Very often much blood is expelled at its incision: hasten therefore if blood overcomes you, then cauterize it.
But if you see a weak and timid one from the incision with iron, then take a thread of lead well made, and constrict it with it: whose method is what we said, and let it go for two days.
Then add it to the mold of lead. Therefore do not cease to press the lead, whenever it prints on the thelil, until it is cut off and falls by itself without effort.
But if the thelil should be of a thick root, then there is some fear and dread in its incision; especially that which is in the belly.
Nevertheless it is possible to cut into half of it. Then cauterize it so that it does not grow back.
Then care for it until the wound is healed.
And be careful not to presume to cut into the thelil which is of a dark color, little feeling, foul appearance; for it is indeed a cancerous swelling; and I shall come with a remembrance of Cancer after this.
Chapter 52.
On the treatment of umbilical hernia.
An umbilical hernia occurs from many causes. Or from fissures in the diaphragm which is above the belly; and from it exits fat or intestine, according to what happens in other ruptures. Or from blood flowing from a Vein or an Artery, according to what was previously stated. Or from wind constricted within it.
But if it is because of a fissure in the diaphragm and the exit of fat; then its color is similar to the color of the body; and it is soft, without pain; and appears in various locations. And if it is because of the exit of intestine, then its location, with that which we have narrated, is of more vehement diversity. Therefore when you press it with your fingers, it disappears; then it returns, and perhaps there is a sound with it; and it swells greatly at the entrance of the bath, and there is vehement labor.
But if it is because of moisture, it is soft, then it does not disappear when you press it with your hand, nor does it contract or increase.
If it is due to blood, then with these signs an abscess appears darkening from the cleavage.
But if it is due to flesh: then the abscess is grave, thick, hard, and is fixed according to a single quantity.
But if it is due to windiness, then its touch is soft.
And the operation on that is, that you then consider if the prominence of the umbilicus is due to blood from an Artery or Vein, or windiness: then it is necessary that you prohibit its cure. For there is fear and dread, as I taught you in the chapter, in which I said abscesses due to artery and vein.
But if the prominence of the umbilicus is due to intestine or mesentery: then it is necessary that you advise the sick person, so that he may hold his breath and stand extended. Then mark with a cautery all around the umbilicus. Afterwards instruct him to lie down between your hands on his back. Then encircle with a broad spatula all around the umbilicus above the place which you marked with a cautery. Afterwards extend the middle of the abscess upwards, with a large hook. Then tie it tightly around with thread or cord from silk with a firm bandage: and let the knot of the bandage be distant.
Then open the middle of the extended abscess above the bandage. If therefore you find it already caught by the bandage: then extract the distant one and insert your index finger into it, and push the intestine towards the interior of the belly: and if you find a mesentery, then take hold of it with a hook and cut off its excess.
But if contrary to this it is an artery or vein: then encircle it greatly. Then return to your operation. And take two needles, and insert into them two strong threads; and insert the two needles into the circle which you made around the apostema in the shape of a cross, making them penetrate.
Then constrict the apostema in four places over the needles; and if you wish, remove the needles, and leave the place until the extended flesh putrifies; and falls off by itself; or cut it yourself when it softens and putrifies.
Then treat it with what is necessary from ointments until it heals.
But if the prominence of the umbilicus is from raw flesh in it, or from moisture; then it is necessary to make concave apostemas, as we said. And you should draw out the blood, or moisture, which you find in it.
Then treat it with what strengthens the place.
Chapter 53.
Concerning the treatment of CANCER.
We have already spoken in the division of the species of Cancer, and how the way to its cure is with medicines; and we cautioned against it being treated with iron so as not to ulcerate it; and we spoke of Cancer generated in the womb, and the caution against its treatment.
And the ancients said that sometimes Cancer is in a place where its eradication is possible; such as Cancer which is in the breasts, or in the thigh, and those like it, from the limbs suited to extracting all of it; especially when it is beginning and small.
But when it grows old, and is large, it is not necessary to approach it.
For I myself have not been able to heal anyone from it; nor have I seen another before me who attained that.
And the operation for it, when it is located as we said, is to precede and loosen the weak part from black bile several times. Then if you find the phlebotomy itself with manifest fullness.
Then prepare the sick person with preparation, in which he will be placed during the operation.
Then project into the Cancer hooks that are suitable for him. Then scoop it out from every side with the skin, according to examination, until nothing remains of its roots; and let the blood run, and do not cut it off quickly, rather press the places, and wipe away all thick blood with your hand, or with whatever instrument is possible there.
But if the thick flow of blood from the incision of an artery or vein opposes you, then cauterize the vein until the blood is severed. Then care for it with the remaining treatment until it is healed.
Concerning the Treatment of Hydropsy.
Chapter Fifty-Four. We have already narrated in the division of species of Hydropsy, and how the aggregation of water is made; and the signs of every species, and its cure with medicine.
And that which is cured with iron is none other than the ascites species alone; and it does not approach the species tympanitis nor the hyposarcae species at all, for that is fatal.
When you have already treated this kind of dropsy of the ear drum with medicine, and your medication has not been successful, then consider. For if the weak patient has already acquired debility, or if there is another illness with him besides dropsy, such as if he has a cough with it, or loosening of the bowels, and similar things to these, then beware lest you treat him with iron, for there is fear of that.
But if you see the patient to be exuberant in strength, and there is no illness with him besides dropsy alone, and he is neither a child nor an old man: then the method of operation on him is that you raise the patient standing between your hands, and a minister behind him shall press his belly with his hand, driving the water to the lower part of the chest.
Then take a thorny spatulate, according to this form. Let it be of two sharp points, long, with a sharp extremity like a spatula. However, let there be some slight shortness in it, so that you do not pierce through to the intestine with it during the operation, and injure it.
Then consider. For if the dropsy is a result of the intestines, then it is necessary that you lengthen the incision from the navel by the length of three fingers, towards the lower part in its direction above the chest.
But if the dropsy arises from a liver ailment, then let your incision be on the left, from the navel by three fingers.
And if its origin is from the spleen, then let the incision be on the right side; and it should not also be necessary that the incision be on the side on which the patient wishes to lie, so that the superfluities do not flow to that weak place.
Then pierce through the whole skin with the instrument. Then insert it into the incision and lift your hand with the spatula between the skin and flesh, as if you were flaying it; and let the amount that is flayed be the size of a nail, or thereabouts.
Then pierce the bladder until the trocar reaches the empty place: and that place is for water. Then withdraw it, and introduce into the opening an instrument which has this shape. And it is like a cannula; made of silver, or brass, or orichalcum, smooth and polished: to the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes, two on one side and one on the other: and the face of its extremity is cut, according to the manner of cutting a reed pen, as you see: in its upper extremity there is a ring.
For when the instrument reaches the water, then it descends immediately upon the instrument, therefore it evacuates a moderate amount of water in an hour.
For if you evacuate from it more than is necessary, the sick man perhaps dies in an hour through dissolution of his animal spirits: or he suffers a swoon which approaches death.
But evacuate from it according to the amount of his strength, and according to what the sick man's dispositions signify to you from the power of his pulse, and from his good condition.
Then withdraw the instrument, and retain the water.
This is because it is retained immediately on account of the skin which retains the opening which is above the bladder: of which I have spoken, so that you pierce it according to that method.
Then repeat the instrument on the next day, if you see the sick man tolerate it; and also evacuate a small amount from the water.
Do this for several days without fear, and guard yourself against error: until there does not remain from the water except a little.
But if you are afraid for the sick man and dismiss a great deal from the water: then care for him with burial in warm sand, and much sweat in a bath and the sun, and expect thirst upon him; and care for him with drying medicines until he is healed: and cauterize over the stomach, liver, and spleen after the extraction of the water, according to what I have spoken in that which precedes.
On the treatment of infants who are born with their urine openings not pierced.
Chapter Fifty-Five.
When any of the infants exits from the belly of its mother and the urine opening of its head is not pierced, or the hole is narrow, or it is in a wrong place.
It is therefore necessary to help with its piercing immediately when it is born with a fine Spatumili according to this form.
Then place a thin lead plumb bob into the hole and tie it; and hold it for three days or four.
When it therefore wants to emit urine, remove it and let it mingle. Then put it back in.
And if you do not place lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over the place will not allow it to close.
He whose hole is narrow is treated with lead as we said for many days until it widens.
Those in whom the hole is in a wrong place are injured. For it is so that from those who are born, the hole is at the end of the head bone; therefore it cannot urinate forward until it raises its bone with its own hand to a higher place. Nor is there generation for him, because the sperm cannot reach the womb according to straightness; and it is a very foul disease.
And the method of operation on him is that the sick person is laid on their back. Then extend the head bone with your left hand using strong extension, and cut the top of the head bone from the place near the penis with a sharp point or a fine Spatumili: as is the incision of a reed or as you shave something so that its middle becomes like the head bone; and so that the hole falls in the middle as it should be.
And beware of the flow of blood during your operation. This often happens. Therefore oppose it with that which cuts blood, and care for the wound until it heals.
Concerning swellings that occur in the foreskin and head of the penis, and putrefaction, blackness, and adhesion.
Chapter 56.
These swellings often occur in the penis and there is a prominence of foul flesh.
And some are malignant from it and some are not malignant.
Therefore, a non-malignant one ought to be suspended with a fine hook and cut off until it is cleansed entirely. Then place upon it cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment. Then care for it afterwards with dyafinicon ointment until it heals.
But if the swelling is malignant and foul-colored, then you ought to apply a cautery to it after its incision and its scraping.
But if the swelling is in the foreskin of a captive, uncircumcised man, and part of the swelling is between the foreskin and part of it is outside, then you ought to remove the swelling which is inside first, until when it consolidates, then care for that which is outside; because when you care for both together, the foreskin will not be secured lest it be pierced.
And they also happen sometimes in the testicles and foreskin, blackness and putrefaction. Therefore, you ought to carve away everything that has already blackened and which is about to putrefy, or which has already putrefied.
Then smear it afterwards with honey that has been mixed with flour of pomegranate grains and crushed herbs sifted through a sieve.
Then care for it with the remaining treatment until it heals.
But if bleeding occurs, then apply a cautery with a lunar cautery, according to this form.
For a cautery is helpful for two things at once, namely, for the flow of blood, and a wound when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the rod is corroded, and it is all destroyed in an hour: then it is necessary that you insert into the urethra of the penis a cannula made of lead, so that the weak one may urinate upon it.
But in the adhesion of the foreskin with the head of the penis, and this indeed adhesion does not happen except in him whose foreskin is healthy, and circumcision is not required upon it: and sometimes adhesion happens because of a wound or an abscess: it is therefore necessary that you scrape it off with a blunt spatula until the ligament is loosened and the head of the penis is freed from every part.
And if it is difficult to distinguish these things exquisitely, then it is necessary that you scrape off something from the head of the penis and from the foreskin. For this is because when the foreskin is delicate it may perhaps be perforated quickly because of its delicacy.
Then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a fine linen cloth which has already been moistened in cold water so that they do not adhere again.
Then treat it with astringent wine until it consolidates.
Chapter 57.
On the cleansing of infants and their treatment in case of an accident.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity, like other wounds: nevertheless since it is from our operation, by our will, and its use is proper in boys, it is necessary that we indicate in it a better operation and an easier way leading to health.
Therefore I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books: because they do not use it in their laws and it is only what we have acquired through experience.
For this is because I have found the greater part of surgeons and phlebotomists to use cleansing, circumcising with a lancet and with forceps: and they use alum, and ligature with thread and incision with a scalpel.
And I myself have now tested all these methods and found none better than cleansing with forceps and ligating with thread.
For in cleansing with a scalpel, the skin often escapes. For the skin of the foreskin has two coats; therefore perhaps the upper skin is cut and the lower coat remains: thus it is necessary to make an incision to cut the other, and there will be future pain. And with cleansing which is done by an alfect, that is, a finger, which tailors use, the incision of the extremity of the male member is not secured; for perhaps it enters into its opening.
But in cleansing with a nail, the iron perhaps goes astray and ruins your operation; and indeed the skin of a child is short in nature, and very often they are born thus, so that they do not need cleansing; and I have already seen this.
But cleansing with forceps and ligation with thread has shown me a good experiment; because the forceps are proportional to the incision; therefore, because the sharpness which is above is like the sharpness which is below. Therefore when you press your hand forward, the two sharpnesses are proportioned, and they fall according to a single operation at one time; and there is compression of a similar shape, containing the skin of the rod from every side, with which there is no error at all.
And the mode of the proper operation is to make you estimate, especially a boy if he is one of those who understand a little, that you do not do anything except bind the thread on his rod only; and let him go until another day.
Then make him rejoice and be glad in every way possible for you, because he receives his own intelligence. Then make him stand between your hands in a prepared posture and let him not be sitting; and hide the forceps in your sleeve or under your foot so that the boy does not see them at all, nor anything of the instruments.
Then insert your hand into its groove and blow upon the skin, and draw it upwards until the head of the groover emerges. Then cleanse it from whatever filth may collect in it.
Then bind the marked place with a double thread. Afterwards, bind a little lower a second ligature. Then hold with your index finger and thumb the place of the lower ligature with a good grip, and cut between the two ligatures. Then quickly raise the skin upwards and extract the head of the groover. Then allow the blood to flow gradually (for it is better) and put powder over it; and upon the powder a cloth in which has been spread yolk of egg previously cooked in rose water, mixed with good recent oil of roses; and let it remain upon it until another day; and treat it with further care until it heals.
But the form of the forceps for cleansing is this.
Let the two ends be blunt and converging so that the branch of the clavicle does not slip out of them; and let the length of the two points be equal to the length of two handles.
But an error which may occur in cleansing is this: that perchance the whole inner skin or a part of it may escape at the incision.
Therefore, it is necessary that you extend it from your hour with your nail before applying the poultice; and cut into it according to equality.
But if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with a hook and cut into it.
But if three days pass and what is under the groover remains swollen and inflamed as an abscess, then let it be so until the abscess becomes settled and hot; and flay it easily, and cut into it according to what is prepared for you; and beware of the head of the groover. For it will not harm him.
Therefore care for it with that which consolidates a wound from powders, which we have related in the treatise on powders; and if it falls from the skin above the measurement, and reaches upward, it will not harm him even then.
Therefore care for it with what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LVIII.
Concerning the Extraction of Retained Urine in the Bladder.
The retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made from a stone, or congealed blood, or pus, or flesh grown there, and similar things from those which we have said from the methods of treatment in the division.
And if the urine is not discharged, and you see that its retention is because of a stone which is already in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for him to be weak, curved over his knees. Then let his feet be placed upon his back, and let him extend his belly from the upper part of his back, and let the weak one hold his breath as much as possible for him. Thus the neck of the bladder is forced toward the expulsion of the stone to the back; therefore the urine is discharged.
But if it is not discharged with what we have said, and the matter is severe upon the weak one; then it is necessary that you administer his extraction with an instrument which is called a syringe, of which this is the form: Let it be made of silver, and let it be slender, smooth, concave like a bird's quill in the subtlety of its radius, long in the likeness of one and a half palms; to which let there be a slender cannula at its head.
And the manner of the exit of urine through it is, that you take a doubled thread and tie wool or cotton at its end with a good ligature, and insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the syringe; and cut off with forceps anything which overflows from the wool, but insert it into the cannula forcefully, like raising.
Then anoint the syringe with oil, or butter, and egg white; and make the weak person sit upon a seat, and embrocate the bladder, and the penis of him with oily moist substances, and olive oil, and warm water.
Then introduce the syringe into the penis with ease, until it reaches the root of the penis.
Then double it upward from the part above the navel.
Then press the syringe within it until it reaches the bladder, and let the weak person feel that he has already reached the empty thing; and this is not done according to this order unless because the passage in which it goes is one in which there is a winding.
Then extend the thread with wool gradually. For urine will follow the wool.
Then draw it out, and make the urine run through the way of urine; and repeat the syringe, and do not cease to do that until the bladder is emptied, and the weak person finds relief.
On the Quality of Bladder Irrigation with a Clepshydra.
Chapter LIX.
When an ulcer occurs in the bladder, or blood congeals in it, or pus constricts in it, and one wishes to distill waters and medicines into it; then let it be done with an instrument which is called a Clepshydra, and this is its form.
For it is deaf, that is, closed. And in it are three openings, two on one side, and one on the other side, as you see.
And the concave place, in which is that which presses, let it be according to the quantity which it will fill itself without addition, until when it is drawn with it something, from moisture it is drawn: and when it is pressed, with it it is expelled to a distance; according to what the clepshydra does, with which naphtha is projected, that is, Greek fire in battles of war.
Therefore, when you wish to inject moisture into the bladder, insert the extremity of the syringe into the moisture and draw with it that which pushes upwards, for moisture is drawn into the concavity of the syringe.
Then insert the extremity of it into the rod, according as we have described concerning the syringe. Then force the moisture with that which forces it; for the moisture reaches the bladder immediately, so that the weak one feels it.
Form of a slender clyster by means of which the bladder is injected.
Let it be made of silver, or brass; of which the head is higher and similar to a small mortar, and beneath it a groove into which a ligature may fall.
Then take the bladder of a ram, and put into it the moisture with which you wish to inject the bladder. Then bind it between the two grooves with a strong ligature using a double thread; and warm that moisture slightly over fire.
Then insert the extremity of the clyster into the rod; afterwards constrict your hand above the bladder with moisture with a decent constriction, until the weak one feels that the moisture has already reached the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder present, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it, and pierce it through all its roundness. Then insert a strong thread into those holes, as they are turned. Then gather the circle, as a bandage is gathered; after you have put into it that which you wish from moisture, and oils, and waters.
Then bind it into the instrument; and do with it as you did with the bladder from expression with your hand, until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter Sixty.
Concerning the Extraction of a Stone.
We have already said in the division, the kinds of stone, and its treatment with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone generated in the kidneys, and the bladder, and the signs of all of it; and I said the stone in which operation falls with the hand and sectioning; and there is a stone generated properly in the bladder; and that which is attached to the rod; and I am narrating that with manifest exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore, I say that a stone generated in the bladder most often occurs in children.
And among its signs is that the urine coming forth from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety; and there appears in it white sand, and a weak man rubs his staff with it, and labors with it, and very often hangs. Then it is erected, and the anus goes out with it in many of them.
And the cure of children is easy from that time until they reach fourteen years. And it is difficult in old men. In youths however it is medium, in that which is between those two; and the cure of him whose stone is larger is easier; and if it is small, the care for it is greater.
Therefore, when we come to the cure, it is necessary first of all that we purify the sick man with an enema which extracts all the dung which is in his bowels; for it sometimes prevents the discovery of the stone in the examination.
Then let the sick man be taken with his feet, and shaken, and moved downwards so that the stone descends to the depths of the bladder, or jumps from a high place several times.
Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and let his hands be under his hips so that the whole bladder becomes sloping downwards.
Then examine him and touch him externally.
If therefore you feel the stone in a space, then hasten immediately with an incision over it.
But if it does not fall at all under your touch, then you must wipe the index finger with oil of the left hand, if the sick man is a boy; or the middle finger if he is a full-grown youth; and insert it into his anus, and inquire for the stone until it stands under your finger: and gradually turn it towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press upon it with your finger and drive it outward toward the place whose incision you desire; and order your assistant to press the bladder with his hand; and order another assistant to extend the testicles upward with his right hand, and with his other hand remove the skin which is under the testicles in the part where the incision is to be made.
Then introduce the speculum, which has this form. And find in it what is between the anus and the testicles, and not in the middle, but to the side near the left buttock; and let the incision be over the stone, and your finger be in the anus; and let the incision be transverse, so that the outer part of the incision is wide and the inner part is narrow, according to the quantity by which the egress of the stone from it will not be greater.
For perhaps the finger, which is in the anus, compresses the stone at the incision and it exits without difficulty.
And know that a stone with angles and edges is difficult to extract because of them.
And there is one which is smooth, similar to a gland, and round; and its exit is easy.
Therefore, for one which has angles and edges, add an incision into the fissure.
But if it does not exit this way, then you must ingeniously work on it; or tie a ligature over it with a crescent-shaped end, which will constrict the stone and not slip from it; or insert a fine instrument under it with a curved end.
But if you cannot work on it above, then enlarge the opening a little. If something overcomes you from blood, cut it off with a scalpel.
But if there is more than one stone, then first drive the largest one towards the bladder opening. Then make an incision over it. Then drive a small one after that; and do the same if there are more than two.
If it is very large, ignorance is to make a large incision above it. For it happens to the weak one of two things, either that he dies, or there occurs to him a continuous distillation of urine: therefore, because the place is not consolidated at all.
But administer its expulsion until it goes out: or ingeniously break it with forceps until you pull it out piecemeal.
Therefore when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with frankincense, and aloe, and dragon's blood: and bind it up, and place upon it a cloth infused with oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water: so that a hot swelling is seated.
Then place the weak one supine on his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day. When therefore you loosen it, embrocate the place with water and much oil.
Then care for it with dyafinicon ointment, and basilicum ointment until it is healed.
But if a further hot swelling, and corrosion, and things similar to those occur in the wound: such as if the blood congeals in the bladder, and urine is prohibited from it: and that is recognized from the issuing of blood with the urine. Therefore insert your finger into the wound, and extract that blood. For if it remains, it brings about corruption of the bladder, and its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, and water, and salt: and oppose to it every kind of thing suitable for its healing until it is healed.
And it is necessary during the whole time of treatment that you bind two thighs and hipbones together, because of the medicines which are placed upon the place.
But if a stone is small, and is in the urethra of the penis, and is fixed in it and prohibits the passage of urine: then care for it with that which I have related before you come to incision. For very often you are excused from incision by this treatment, for I have already proven it.
And take a perforator of iron, with a triangular point, sharp, fixed in wood.
Then take a thread and bind it to a stick under a stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the perforating iron into the stick easily until the perforator reaches the stone itself; and revolve the perforator with your hand on the stone gradually; and try to make a perforation in it until you make it penetrate from the other side.
For urine is immediately discharged.
Then press your hand on that which remains of the stone from the outer part of the stick. For it is broken and comes out with the urine, and the sick person is healed.
But if this treatment is not prepared for you because of something that prevents it: then bind a thread under the stone and another thread above the stone. Then cut above the stone on the stick itself between the two ligatures. Then extract it. Then loosen the bandage and cleanse the congealed blood that forms in the wound.
And it is not necessary to bind the thread under the stone unless so that it does not return to the bladder; and the other thread above unless so that when the thread is loosened after the exit of the stone, the skin returns to its place and heals the wound; and because of this it is necessary for you when binding the upper thread to lift the skin upwards so that it comes back to its completion and heals the wound, as we have said.
Chapter LXl.
On the Extraction of Stones from Women.
Stones rarely form in women.
But if it should happen to one of them a stone, then the cure is difficult and is forbidden because of many ways.
One of them is: that a woman might possibly be a virgin.
And the second is, because you do not find a woman who will reveal herself to a doctor when she is chaste, or from those having husbands.
The third is, because you do not find a woman who well knows this art, especially the operation with the hand.
And the fourth is the distance from the place of the stone: wherefore it needs deep incision, and there is fear in that.
But if necessity provokes to that, then it is necessary that you take a woman doctor, well knowing: and few are found.
But if you deprive yourself of those things then seek a chaste doctor, subtle and present a female midwife well taught in the matter of women, or a woman who inclines to this art, a part of the art; therefore make her present, and especially to her, that she do all that you command her from inquiry upon the stone.
First of all which is, that she look to see if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary that she insert a finger into her anus and seek the stone.
If therefore she finds it, she will constrict it under her finger, and then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vulva of the weak woman, and inquire about the stone, after she has placed her left hand upon the bladder, and compresses it with a good compression.
If therefore she finds the stone then it is necessary that gradually she move it from the orifice of the bladder to the lower parts with all her strength until it arrives with it at the root of the thigh.
Then cut upon it at the opposition of the middle of the vulva at the root of the thigh, from whichever part she prepares for it and feels the stone in that part: and her finger is not removed from the stone, constricting under it: and let the incision be small at first. Then he should introduce a probe over that incision.
Then he should introduce a probe over that incision. If therefore he feels a stone, then let him add to the incision according to the proportional amount by which the stone exits from it.
And you should know that there are many kinds of stones. For among these there is a small one and a large one, a smooth one and a rough one, a long one, and a round one having branches.
Therefore know its kind so that it may be made clear to you by this regarding what you see.
If therefore blood overcomes you, then add pounded lint in its place and hold it for one hour until the blood is stemmed.
Then return to your operation until the stone comes out; and do that you prepare for yourself from the instruments which I mentioned in the extraction of a stone in men so that you may be helped through them in your operation.
But if blood flow overcomes you and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery which has been cut then put powder over the place and bind it with powders in a decent bandage and do not change it; and leave the stone and do not extract it. For perhaps the weak woman may die. Then attend to the wound.
When therefore the sharpness of the blood subsides after days and the place festers, then return to your operation until the stone comes out.
Chapter Sixty-Two.
On Incising for Aqueous Hernia.
An aqueous hernia is nothing but a collection of moisture in the white sac which is under the skin containing the testicle; and it is called a sac.
And sometimes it is in its own groin which nature prepared for it in that part until it swells; which is another egg and it is the skin of the testicle between the white sac which we mentioned; and this does not happen except rarely.
And indeed the generation of these branches is from a weakness that occurs in the testicles; therefore this matter is poured forth to them. And sometimes it happens from a blow upon the testicles.
And this humidity has many colors. For its color is either inclined toward yellowness, or it is blood-red, or fecal, black, or it is watery white, and that which is more.
And the signs by which it is known where the aggregation of water is are these. For if it is in the white sifac which we have said, then the abscess is round in length a little like the shape of an "o," and the testicle does not appear because the humidity contains it from every side.
And if the humidity is in its own scrotum, then the abscess is round with a part of an "o," and because of this a man thinks that it is another egg.
And if the humidity is between the skin of the testicles and the white sifac, then it falls under the sense.
When therefore you wish to know the color of the humidity, then experience the color of the humidity in the abscess with a square instrument, whose shape precedes. According to that therefore which comes out in the trace of the instrument, judge concerning that which is between it.
When therefore we come to the treatment with iron, it is necessary that you advise the sick person that he should be bled if it is possible for him; and you see his body full.
Then he is laid on his back on a high thing a little, and many cloths are put under him.
Then you sit on his left side and direct the attendant to sit on his right side who should extend his instrument towards one of two sides of the skin of the testicles and towards the part marveling at the belly.
Then take a broad scalpel and cut the skin of the testicles from the middle through its length, up to near the comb; and let the incision be made according to the straightness of an equidistant line which divides the skin of the testicles until it reaches the white sifac comprehending it; and flay it out and observe, or beware from this, that you cut it; and let your flaying be from the part which hangs with the egg more; and carefully scrutinize with the flaying according to the quantity that is possible for you.
Then pierce the full bladder with a wide perforation and extract all the water.
Then separate between the two lips of the incision with hooks and extend the bladder upward, and do not touch the skin encompassing the testicles; and incise the bladder however it is possible for you to incise it, either with its entirety or in pieces, especially its thinner side. For if you do not diligently examine it, there will be no safety in its incision, lest the water return.
But if the external testicle proceeds from its skin during your operation: then when you have completed the incision of the bladder, replace it. Then join the two lips of the skin of the testicles with suture.
Then care for it like the other wounds until it heals.
But if you find a corrupted testicle from blackness or other signs, then it is necessary to tie the vessels which are suspensive, fearing the flow of blood.
Then cut off the testicle with its suspensory ligament and extract the testicle; afterwards care for it as we have said.
But if the water is collected in two parts, then know that there are two branches; therefore cut the other part according to what you did in the other equally.
And if it seems fitting to you that the operation be one, then do so; then wipe away the blood. And insert into the incisions wool steeped in oil, or in rose oil; and place outside other wool than that which you have steeped in wine and oil, and spread it over the two testicles and the belly; and put double cloths on top, they are bandages; and tie them on top with a bandage having six strands according to this form.
Then take two cloths and have them taken and filled with a cooked poultice according to this similarity: and let their ends be pressed from the elbow or wet wool; and they are gathered together with a bandage on the upper arms: and one of the ends takes hold above the anus up to the back, and the second takes hold at the side of the breastbone: and two ends on top of the two thighs below and the other two ends on top of the two groins, and let the entire bandage be gathered on the upper arms.
And sometimes this membrane is artificially treated with a cautery in the place of incision with iron; and it is as you should take a sharp knife-cautery and cut the skin of the testicles with it; and ignite it according to what we have said: until when a white sifac appears containing water, then take a cautery of this shape.
Greek letters are assimilated.
Then pierce it with that cautery and ignite it until all the moisture comes out.
Then extend the sifac with hooks and flay it with a thin ignited cautery and cut into it as much as you are able until you root out all of it.
And be careful that the fire does not touch the testicle.
And know that this operation is safer and further from hemorrhage and better than the operation with incision.
But if it presents opposition to you in the hour of incision, or in the hour of cautery an inflamed abscess, or hemorrhage, or anything else: then it is necessary that you treat what opposition it presents to you from it with the treatment which suits it according to what has been said previously.
But if he is weak and fearful, and does not await this operation because of its horror: then administer a perforation according to what I relate it: and it is.
When you are assured at your place by that which we said about the signs, that the membrane is watery: then it is necessary that you make the weak person sit upon a raised seat.
Then pierce the abscess in the lower part of it with a broad trocar; and place the piercing according to the length of the body; and let the opening be wide until all the water runs out.
Then place a compress on the spot and bind it, and let it be so that the remainder of the water runs out; then treat it until the wound is healed.
But if there is an opposition to the water escaping at the hour you pierce it; and this is not except because the white fatty layer makes opposition at the wound's opening and prevents the water from going out: then it is necessary that you introduce a pen into the wound, or an instrument with which water of dropsy patients is extracted, whose shape precedes; or add a little in the operation of the wound.
And know that the water returns and collects again after six months, or thereabouts. Therefore when it collects, then it is returned to according to the same way, and the sick man will pass his days.
Chapter Sixty-Three.
Concerning the care of fleshy branches.
Know that in the section on this branch, there is fear leading to destruction in many dispositions. Therefore it seems to me that its dismissal is saving from it.
And I am remembering the operation on it, and the kind of abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses occur in bodies, from which the testicles are composed; and this happens from many causes, namely.
Either from acute or sharp superabundance, which is poured onto the testicles. Or from a blow.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body and pain is not found in it: and it is a heavy abscess.
And perhaps it is a stony abscess, whose color is dark brown, and there is no sensation to it.
And sometimes it happens from the knotting of arteries and their inflation, as I have already mentioned its remembrance; or from the inflation of veins.
Which therefore is from them from the inflation of arteries, it is recognized by the disposition of the abscess when you compress it with your fingers. And it is not necessary for you to touch it altogether.
That which is done by the inflation of veins, nothing is dispersed from it upon compression with the fingers.
And now it is possible that a section be made on this species, and on the other flesh; and it is to cut the skin of the testicles. Then extend the testicle upward and extract it with white silk; and free the spermatic cord from the vessels, and tie the vessels; and incise the spermatic cord after you have freed it from every part of the parts of the testicle.
If therefore the testicle is consolidated with those flesh born together, then it is necessary that you draw out the testicle and incise it.
And if there is adhesion between something of the spermatic cord or in that which is between the vessels, then it is necessary that you free all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
But if there is a birth of flesh in the place of adhesion which is behind: then it is necessary that you incise all of it and extract the testicle as we have said.
When therefore your operation is complete then fill the wound with lint steeped in rose oil and wine; then care for it with the remaining care until it heals.
Chapter LXIIII
Concerning the Care of Branches, which are with Vines.
Hydrocele is a swelling enveloped with a certain involution, like a dropsy, with the softening of the testicles; and it makes difficult walking and exercise.
And in the treatment of this ailment there is fear because of that of which mention was made before.
But it is necessary for us to say that an operation be done on it according to what the ancients did.
I therefore say that it is necessary that you make the patient sit upon a raised seat. Then press the spermatic cord of the testicles downward. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, along with the veins that are near the penis; and let another attendant hold them, and extend them with a vigorous extension.
Then cut with a wide, sharp scalpel in a transverse section in the direction of the veins, until the veins are exposed.
Then skin from every part, as we told you in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
Then place a needle with a double thread into them, and tie it in the first of the places where the veins occur; and tie it again at the last of them. Then cut them in a straight middle section along the length of the body, and extract what collects from humid, corrupted excretions.
Then care for the wound with the care of the other wounds, in which you wish to generate pus, so that the veins which nourish one of the testicles may fall away. For it is not bad through that.
But if it should happen to a vein with all the veins, then it is necessary that they be extracted because of this testicles with the veins: so that the testicle is not deprived of nourishment because of the incision, and wastes away, or dries up, and there is no benefit with them.
Chapter LXV.
Concerning the care of Intestinal Branches.
The outcome of this Intestinal Branch is from a section, which occurs in an extended colon over the belly in the groin part from the belly button.
Therefore the intestines descend from that rupture to one testicle. And this rupture is either from the colon, or its extension.
And these two species occur from many causes: either from percussion, or a jump, or a shout, or the lifting of a heavy thing, and similar things.
And the sign when it is from the extension of the colon It happens gradually over a long time and does not happen suddenly; and it is an abscess equal towards the depth because the suture compresses the intestine.
And its sign is when it is from the section of a suture, because it causes to happen from its beginning intense pain suddenly; and it is a separate abscess appearing under the nearby skin; and that is because of the exit of the intestine and its course to the outside of the suture.
And sometimes it issues forth with intestine a swelling; and this is called an intestinal Ramex and a swelling; and sometimes it happens with flatulence.
And sometimes feces runs into the intestine and is retained there; and it is with this deadly to the sick person because it causes severe pain to happen, and especially when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of the species of this sickness with iron there is fear; therefore it is necessary that one should beware in this matter.
And the manner of the operation is that you direct the sick person to return the intestine with his hand to the interior of its cavity if it obeys the return. Then he is laid back on his neck between your hands; and raise his legs.
Then extend the skin which follows the skin upward and cut all the skin of the testicles through its length. Then fix hooks in the two lips of the incision according to as you judge to open the incision with them; and let the incision be according to the quantity as much as possible so that an egg may exit from it.
Then scrape the sutures and what are under the skin of the testicles until when the white suture, hard on all sides is uncovered; then insert your index finger into that which follows the testicle into that which is between the white suture, which is under the skin of the egg, and between the second suture, and loosen with it the adhesion which is in the back part of the egg.
Then move with your right hand to the inner skin of the testicles and with this extend the white linen upwards with your left hand, and lift the testicle with the linen to the part to be cut, and order the assistant to extend the testicle upwards, and you will loosen the adhesion which is behind after complete detachment.
And search with your fingers so that nothing from the intestine remains entangled in the hard white linen. But if you find something from it, then push it down towards the lower abdomen.
Then take a needle with a thick thread made of licorice from ten threads and insert it at the last linen, that is, the tunic which is under the skin of the testicles following the incision, then cut off the ends which protrude from the thread until there are four threads. Then arrange some of them over some in the shape of a cross and tie them with the linen bandage we spoke of, because it is under the skin of the testicles with a strong ligature, until nothing from the vessels which nourish them can send anything to them so that hot abscess does not occur there. And place a second ligature outside the first ligature, distant from it by less than two fingers. And after these two ligatures let out from the linen which is under the skin of the testicles a quantity the size of a finger and cut off the rest according to its roundness, and remove the testicle from it.
Then cauterize the lower part of the skin of the testicles with the incision from which blood and pus flow, as we have narrated in what has been said before.
Then administer wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound and administer the bandage we have spoken of. And sometimes the white linen that we mentioned is cauterized after its incision fearing bleeding. Very often this happens. And release the ligature until it falls by itself.
But if its falling is delayed, then embrocate it with warm water and place upon it that which we have said, until it falls.
Then care for the wound with the remaining care of wounds, until it is healed.
Chapter Sixty-Six.
Concerning a windy branch.
In this branch I have not seen anyone who dared to perform surgery upon it with iron.
And first of all they said that it is done as we have narrated in the branch which is with a vine. Which is, that you bind the vessels after section above them with ease below; then cut in the middle, and finally care for it with that which opens it up, until the vessels fall away; and care for the wound, according to what we said, until it is healed.
Chapter Sixty-Seven.
Concerning a rupture which occurs in the groins.
When a rupture occurs in the groins, as we have said, and the place protrudes, and nothing from the intestines descends to the testicles; and if it does descend, it is a small amount, and it returns in all hours: but if time prolongs with it, a fissure is added to the inguinal canal, until the intestines descend into the inguinal canal.
And this occurs from the extension of the inguinal canal which is in the groins, as we have said. Which is because the inguinal canal is extended; then it is softened and the place becomes inflamed and protrudes.
And its care is with a cautery, as its preceding narration has shown.
And sometimes it is cured with iron, according to this method: and it is that the patient lies on his back between your hands. Then cut the inflamed and protruding place of the rupture, by a section across its width, according to the amount of three fingers.
Then bind the ligature and what is under the skin until a white vein is revealed, which follows it beneath the skin.
Then take a ray and place it upon the prominent spot from the vein and press it deep into the abdomen.
Then choose two prominent spots above the end of the ray from the vein and join them together with a suture; then extract the end of the ray.
And do not cut into the vein at all, nor pull the egg, nor anything else, as I have taught you in the treatment of intestinal branches.
Then treat it with wound care. When therefore you cut the threads clean it and restore the wound until it is consolidated.
For the vein contracts and no prominence of a rupture is added.
And cautery is better in this place; because it is closer to safety.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the softening of the skin of the testicles.
Often the skin of the testicles is softened in some men, because of which the flesh between them is softened and its appearance is spoiled.
Therefore it is necessary for him who is asked in its treatment, to make the sick man lie on his back and cut away all the softened skin onto the natural skin.
Then join the two lips with a suture; and if you wish, use at first three or four sutures on the excess softened skin and firm the suture.
Then cut between the sutures.
Then treat it with the care of other wounds until it is healed and the threads fall out.
Chapter LXIX.
On castration.
Know that castration is excommunicated in our law and because of this it would be permissible for me not to remember it in this book of mine; and there is no need to remember it except for two reasons.
One of which is, that it be in the knowledge of medicine when asked about it: and that he know its cure to whom it happens.
And another way is, that we very often need the castration of certain animals, for our benefit through it, such as rams, kids, and cats, and similar animals.
I say therefore, that castration is done according to two ways. Or by abrasion. Or by fissure, and section.
But in that which is done by abrasion, the way of the operation is: that we make the animal sit in warm water, until its testicles are softened and relaxed, and hang down: then rub them with your hand, until they are resolved and do not appear under touch.
But in castration by fissure and section, it is necessary that you hold the animal, and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then ligature the spermatic cord, and cut above all the egg with one incision, until when two eggs proceed: then incise them after you have skinned both, and do not leave anything above them except a subtle wick, which is above the vessels.
And this way of castration is better than that which is done by abrasion: because abrasion perhaps leaves something of the testicles, wherefore the animal desires intercourse.
Then care for the wound until it heals.
Chapter Seventy.
Concerning the care of hermaphrodites in two ways.
A hermaphrodite is from males according to two ways. One of them is because it appears in him that follows a space, or in the skin of the testicles, in that which is between the two testicles, a figure like that of a woman's vulva, in which there are hairs: and sometimes urine runs from that which is in the skin of the testicles.
In women, however, there is one species, and it is the vulva of a woman above the pubic bone, just like the testicles of a man, very small, prominent outwardly: one of which is like the penis of a man, and two like two testicles.
And the treatment of the three species, two from men and one species from women, is: because it is necessary that you cut away the added flesh until their impression escapes. Then treat them with the care of other wounds.
But in the second species of men, from which urine flows, which is in the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is there any treatment at all.
Chapter LXXI.
On the incision of a tenting and prominent flesh in the vulva of women.
A tenting may perhaps be added upon the natural part until its appearance becomes unsightly and foul: and sometimes it magnifies in certain women so much that it expands like in men, and reaches even to intercourse.
Therefore it is necessary that you grasp the excess tenting with your hand or a hook and make an incision; and do not stop in the incision, especially deep at the root: so that bleeding does not occur.
Then treat it with the care of other wounds until it heals.
But the flesh that arises is flesh that is born in the opening of the womb until it fills it; and perhaps it protrudes outward according to the likeness of a tail; and on account of this some ancients call the ailment tailed. Therefore it is necessary that we cut it like we cut the tenting, and treat it until it heals.
On the care of an alratic vulva, which is a vulva not perforated.
Chapter LXXII.
An alratic vulva is one that is not perforated, or has a small opening. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is from a preceding illness and it itself is made either from flesh added that was born, or thin pus, or thick; and it is made either in the depth of the womb, or on its sides, or in its upper part, or lower part; and it prohibits coitus and impregnation and childbirth, and perhaps prohibits menstruation.
And the knowledge of it is made by the midwife's view, if evident swelling is nearby.
But if it is not evident, then seek it with your fingers, or with a rod.
But if the swelling is from thin pus and is near by two lips then hurry and break it open.
And it is as if you put poultices on two lips.
Then place the index fingers of both your hands together, and let the woman be on her back with her legs spread. Then extend the two lips with strength until the thin pus is broken and the swelling is opened.
Then take wool and soak it in oil and place it upon the spot; and let the woman come every day so that the place does not solidify with other fluid.
But if the pus is thick and dense then it is necessary that you cut it with a wide spatula similar to a myrtle leaf.
But if the swelling is from flesh that was born then suspend it with hooks and cut into it; and let there be medicines with you which stop the flow of blood without biting, such as acacia and dragon's blood and alum aggregate with egg white.
Then administer a wide lead tube so that the wound does not heal quickly, hold it for several days; and administer a bandage of dry linen, then let the rest be cured until it is healed.
And sometimes there is born a nativity of other flesh within the womb; therefore it is necessary that they be cut according to this manner: but if there is no cancerous swelling for a cancerous swelling in the womb should not be opposed with iron at all.
Chapter Seventy-Three.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, athehelil, and bothor rubeae in the vulvas of women.
Hemorrhoids are indeed the opening of the veins' orifices, until much blood constantly flows from them.
When therefore hemorrhoids become ancient, they become athehelil; and I have already said in the division of their species and signs: and I will say here which ones receive healing from them, and which ones do not.
I therefore say that hemorrhoids which are in the orifice of the matrix, and do not appear to the senses: then there is no healing for them with iron.
But those from them which are in the orifice of the matrix on which sensation falls are those that are healed.
It is therefore necessary that you introduce the woman into a cold house. Then extend the athehelil with forceps, or with a rough cloth, and cut them from their roots.
Then sprinkle upon them at the flow of blood from one of the cutting powders without modification: such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and thus, and those similar to them.
Then press her feet against the wall for an hour. Afterwards place her in cold water.
But if the flow of blood persists: then make her sit in a decoction of sumacs, and pomegranate rinds, and galls, and those similar to them.
Then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it upon her back.
If blood is therefore cut off with it, it is good: and if not, make the windswept ones adhere to the back, and nipples, without scarification.
Then take wool and submerge it in the juice of tamarind, or the juice of arugula, or the juice of twigs of alang-alang, that is, aglantus, Pontic wine, and make it adhere to the place.
Therefore, when the abscess is quiet, care for the place with ointments until it heals.
However, a red ulcer resembles the heads of alfa-alfa, and it has a rough appearance.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut out what appears from it, as I said in the chapter equally; and care for it until it heals.
Chapter Seventy-Four.
On Perforation of the Uterus which Occurs in the Womb.
Many kinds of abscesses occur in the womb, such as cancer, and stony abscesses, and ulcers, and adubelati, and alekilati, that is herpes, aestiomemus, and fistulas, and hemorrhoids, and fissures, and thelil, and hot abscesses.
And I have indeed already said all these diseases and their kinds, and the signs of them, and their cures in the division: it is necessary that I say in this treatise a hot abscess which occurs in the womb, when it is from abscesses which collect pus, and you wish to know how its opening is made with iron.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to consider. Then if the pain of the abscess in its beginning is acute with percussion, and heat, and fever; and you see it to be red; if numbness falls upon it, then do not hurry with its perforation; and care for it with that which helps with its maturation, until when the sharpness of the occurrences becomes quiet.
Then it is necessary that you make the woman sit upon a seat which beats two seats, and recline, or lean upon her back, and gather her feet to the lower part of her belly; and let her hips be spread, and let her put her arms under her knees, and bind each with a suitable bandage to it.
Then let the midwife sit from the right side, and administer the instrument by which the orifice of the womb is opened.
And it is necessary when you wish to administer this instrument, that you fix it with the Speculum deep in the matrix of the woman: so that what enters from the instrument is not more than the depth of the matrix, and does not injure the weak parts.
But if the instrument should be longer than deep, then it is necessary that you place lint on the covering of the deep matrix: so that entry of the whole instrument into the depth of the matrix is prohibited: and it is necessary that you place the handle, which runs in the instrument, on the upper side: and that you hold the instrument, and that the assistant revolves the handle until the depth of the matrix is opened.
Therefore when the Exterior appears and is touched by the hand and is soft and pliable: then it is necessary that you cut it at its head with a broad spatula.
Therefore when the blood is evacuated, it is necessary that you place a linen cloth soaked in rose oil or green oil, in which there is a certain astringency: and place the linen cloth and draw out the incision into the depth of the matrix.
And place externally on the matrix, and above the comb clean wool soaked in water, in which apples have been boiled.
Then let it be treated after two days with an ointment suitable for it until it is healed.
And sometimes the matrix and the wound are washed so that it is cleansed with water and honey; then with water in which the root of lily or long birthwort has been boiled; then let it return to the ointment.
But if the wound should be hidden inside the matrix, then it is necessary that you refrain from treating it with iron, but rather care for it with what we said in the division.
Chapter LXXV.
Doctrine of Obstetrics: How living embryos are treated, according to an unnatural figure having exited.
It is necessary for an obstetrician to know first the figure of natural childbirth.
Therefore, from its signs, it is that when you see a woman compressed toward the lower parts, and desires to smell air, and finds relief above her about childbirth, and hastens the exit of the embryo: then you know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and its exit is upon its head, and following with it: or suspended, or hanging from the navel.
Therefore when you see these signs, it is necessary that her belly be compressed so that the embryo descends quickly.
For when it descends upon its head, the following parts descend with it, and are cleansed from those superfluities by good cleansing.
But that which is besides this childbirth is unnatural, undesirable.
For sometimes the fetus goes forth upon its feet, and its body goes forth before its head, and its feet, and its hands together, or one of its feet; or its head goes forth and its hands; or its belly goes forth; and perhaps it turns upon its neck, and similar things from undesirable figures.
Therefore it is necessary for an obstetrician to be prudent, subtle in all these things, and beware of error and deception: and I am showing every figure from them, and how its ingenuity is in it, and may be signified by it, and stand upon it.
When the fetus goes forth upon its head by its natural exit, and it becomes vehement upon the woman, and childbirth becomes difficult for her, and you see her strength already weakened: then make her sit upon a seat, or let women hold her; and vaporize her vulva with decocted fenugreek, and with moist oils.
Then let the obstetrician introduce a small spatula between her fingers, and grasp the following part with it, and cut it with her fingernail until what is in it runs out from moisture; and press the belly of the woman until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend then it is necessary that the woman be given an enema of fenugreek mucilage with sesame oil.
Then order her after the enema to compress it; and make her cough when compressed, and hold her mouth and nose for one hour. For the fetus will immediately come out.
But if two hands of the fetus emerge first, it is necessary that you return them gradually with ease. But if it does not obey upon entering, then place the woman over a seat and raise her feet upwards; then strike the seat on the ground; and let the woman be held so that she does not fall during the impact.
But if the hands do not emerge and the fetus dies, then cut them and extract the remainder of the fetus; and tie its hand with cloth and extract it evenly for it will come out.
The exit of the embryo upon its feet. When the fetus emerges on its feet then it is necessary that you push them upwards; then turn the fetus gradually; afterwards equalize it.
Then take one of its feet and extend it gradually.
When they emerge as far as the hips, then order her to compress it and make her cough when compressed; for it will come out if God wills.
And if it does not come out with what we have described, then return the fetus gradually until you place it according to its natural form. For it will then come out with an easy exit.
But if it is hindered with all that we have described, then take fenugreek mucilage and sesame oil and dissolved gum; and strike the whole in a mortar with good percussion; then smear the woman's vulva and lower part of her belly with it. Then have her sit in warm water until her lower abdomen follows suit.
Therefore, when you see that its lower parts are already heated, then make for it a poultice of myrrh and apply it. When therefore the poultice has remained for one hour, then make it sit upon a seat. Then make it snore and compress its mouth and nose and press the lower part of its belly with gentle pressure. For the pus will come out immediately.
The expulsion of the fetus is upon the knees and hands. When it comes out according to this form, then he will begin gently introducing his hands. Then the woman is laid on her back upon her neck and her feet hang down to the lower part, and she lies upon a bed and entwines her hands. Then press upon her belly gradually. Then draw out what is under her feet from the cushions until she is prepared in the lower part. And if the fetus does not come out then take hold of her feet and move them with a vigorous motion. Then press what is above the hypochondria gradually until the fetus ascends to the upper parts. Then let him introduce his hands and equalize the fetus gradually and order the woman to compress herself until the fetus comes out.
The expulsion of the fetus is horizontal, hanging from the hands. He will begin by reducing his hand. But if he cannot reduce it then raise the woman and make her walk.
But if she cannot walk then make her lie upon a bed and strike her legs with a vigorous concussion.
Then administer the poultice which you have prepared from mucilages.
But if she receives childbirth then make her sit upon a seat. Then strive in reducing the hand and equalize the fetus according to its natural form and make the woman snore and order her to compress herself until it comes out.
The exit of the fetus over its neck, with hands spread out, and its face towards the back of its mother. The midwife must hold the hand of the fetus, then turn it gradually, and equalize it with ease.
When therefore it is equalized, then place upon its vulva what we have described from oil and gums.
Then instruct her to move gradually. When therefore you have done that, then make her sit upon a seat, and instruct her to incline towards her right side. Then instruct her to compress, and make her snort when it is pressed.
The exit of the prepared fetus over its side. When it descends to the orifice of the matrix according to this method with the secundina, then split the secundina with your nail until it is evacuated from moisture.
If therefore it is suspended over the face of the fetus and its neck, then cut it from the umbilicus so that it is not retained and dies.
Then press the fetus towards the interior until you place it according to what is necessary, and instruct the woman to compress herself several times for it will exit by an easy passage.
The Exit of Twins or Many Fetuses. Know that twins are very often born, and sometimes three, and four are born. However that is extraordinary and rarely happens.
Five however is against nature and they do not live entirely and it contains them although they are multiplied, one secundina and they are separated by a sifach distinguishing the ligature in the umbilicus of each of them.
And sometimes they exit just as one fetus exits by a natural, easy passage and they exit by a difficult passage, as we have described.
And if some of them are difficult at childbirth and they arrive at what we said from unnatural figures then take care of them as we have described and let there be a subtle midwife, and she does what she does with ease and slowness and devises according to every figure with what is prepared for her from ingenuity leading to health.
Remember what is formed in the womb from embryos, and are aborted.
Sometimes one is formed in the womb, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten; and it has already been verified with me that a woman aborting emitted seven, and another fifteen, all formed.
Which was done by the measurement of the glorious wise man.
Therefore all this ought to be in the knowledge of Obstetrics. Perhaps it may happen to her like that one; therefore let her oppose him with what is necessary.
Chapter LXXVI.
On the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you care for a dead fetus as I said in the division from medication, and it does not exit, and you are forced to use surgery with your hand, then it is necessary that you consider.
If therefore the woman is of sound health, and is not with any of the accidents from which her loss is feared: then it is necessary that the woman be laid on her back on a bed, and her head inclined downwards, and her legs elevated; and let attendants hold her from two sides, or she be tied to the bed so that her body is not pulled out at the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the mouth of the uterus with oily substances with mucilage of marshmallow, fenugreek, and flaxseed.
Then let the midwife anoint her hand with these oils and mucilages; then let her insert it into the uterus with ease. Then she should seek with it a place in which to fix hooks from the fetus, and places suitable for that.
Consider then, if the fetus is prepared to descend upon its head: then fix hooks into its eyes, or into its neck, or into its mouth, or into its palate, or under its chin, or into its clavicle, or into places near the ribs, and under the hypochondria.
But if the descent is upon his feet, then into the breastbone and his middle ribs.
And it is necessary that he hold the hook with his right hand and put the curve of it into what is between the fingers of his left hand; and introduce it with his hand easily, and fix the hook in some one of those places which we have mentioned, until he reaches the empty part.
Then fix opposite to it another hook, or a third if necessary, so that the contraction is equal and does not incline to one side.
Then let it be extended with equal extension, and let there not be extension according to straightness only, but rather moved to every part so that its outlet is relieved; just as is done with a tooth in its eradication.
And it is necessary in what is between that, that the extension be softened. And if a part is retained from it, then it is necessary that the midwife anoint some fingers with oil, and introduce them from the side, so that she may revolve what is retained with them.
If therefore a part of the fetus goes out, then let the hooks be changed to another place which is higher; do this until the whole fetus goes out.
If therefore the hand goes out before other things, and it is not possible to reduce it because of its constriction, then it is necessary that a cloth be wrapped over it. Then draw it out until the whole of it goes out, cut it either at the joint of the sole or at the elbow; and thus it is necessary that you do in one hand and in both feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or constriction happens to it in the outlet, or there is water collected in its head; then it is necessary that he insert between his fingers a Spatulum spinosum, and pierce with it the head, and draw out the water; or break it up itself with an instrument which is called Almisdac; the form of which comes with the forms of the other instruments in the chapter which is after this.
Similarly he should do if the fetus is of a large head, then it is necessary that you make an incision above the shoulder: or extract it with forceps, as we said. Then draw out the bones with forceps.
But if the head emerges and is constricted at the fork: then cut it, until the moisture which is in the chest is poured out.
But if it does not become entangled, nor yield to coming out: then cut the head into pieces, as much as is possible for you.
But if below the abdomen there is an abscess or dropsy: then it is necessary that you perforate it, until the moisture runs out of it.
But if the fetus is on its feet, then its extraction is easy and its direction to the mouth of the womb is slight.
But if it is constricted at the belly or chest: then it is necessary that you extract it with a cloth which you have wound around your hand: and cut the belly or chest until what is inside them runs out.
But if the remaining limbs are removed, and the head returns: then let the midwife introduce her left hand. If therefore the mouth of the womb is open, then let her introduce her hand deep into the womb, and seek the head with it, and draw it up to the mouth of the womb with her fingers: then let her introduce one hook or two hooks into it and draw it out with them.
But if the mouth of the womb constricts because of a hot abscess which happens to it: then it is not necessary that she labors upon it, but rather it is necessary at that time to administer a poultice of humid things, fatty things: and apply plasters; and let her sit in waters which soften and moisten.
But if the fetus is on its side, then it is possible that it will become equal: then administer what we said for a living fetus.
If that is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and removed.
And you must not leave anything from the second layer inside at all.
Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then administer what we said for hot abscesses that occur in the matrices.
But if there should be a flow of blood, then let it descend into astringent waters, and administer the remaining care.
And I myself have already seen a woman in whose belly a fetus had died; then she became pregnant again with another, afterwards that fetus also died. Therefore, after a long time, an abscess occurred in her navel, and it swelled up until it opened, and it began to discharge pus.
I was therefore summoned to treat her, and I treated her for a long time; but the wound did not heal.
Therefore, I placed upon it some plasters of strong attraction; and an opening came out of the place. Then several days passed, and another opening appeared. I was therefore amazed there, since there is no opening in the belly.
Therefore I thought that they were from the bones of the dead fetuses.
I therefore examined the wound and extracted many bones, with the woman being in her better conditions; and she now lives thus for a long time, and she discharges a little pus from the place.
And I did not affirm this as something foreign, except because there is knowledge in it, and assistance to that which the craftsman physician administers with his hand from healing.
Chapter Seventy-Seven.
Concerning the Forms of Instruments Necessary in the Extraction of a Fetus.
The form of the screw by which the mold is opened.
Below here is the form of a Strictor, as it is made equal in the books, to which two vortexes are equally set at the two ends of two pieces of wood. But this screw must be made thinner than a ligature and to do so it should be made of ebony or boxwood.
And the width of all the wood should be about two fingers and the edge of each of them is about one finger, and the length of each of them is a palm and a half; and in the middle of the two pieces of wood are two additions of the same kind of wood, which are already fixed on both of them, whose length is half a palm and a little more or less; and the width of each is about two fingers, or a little more or less.
And these two additions are inserted into the opening of the mold so that it opens with them when you turn the two screws.
Another form similar to that one, but thinner and lighter.
Let it be made of ebony wood or boxwood according to the likeness of forceps. But at the end of it there should be two additions as you see here above; and the length of each addition from them is about a palm; and the width of each is two fingers.
Therefore when you wish to open the mold with it, then make the woman sit on a bed with her legs hanging down, opening what is between her thighs. Then insert these two joined additions into the mold; and you are holding the lower end of the instrument between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps, equally according to the amount that you wish from the opening of the mold's mouth until the midwife does what she wants.
The form of another screw which the ancients called the Form of Impelling, by which the fetus is impelled.
The form of Almisdac, by which a large head is crushed; and it is similar to forceps, which has teeth at the end as you see.
And sometimes it is oblong, like forceps according to this shape, as you see, which has teeth like the teeth of a saw, with which one cuts and crushes.
The form of Uncini having one point.
The form of Uncini having two points.
The form of Spatula having two ends for cutting off the head.
The form of two Spatulas also wide.
All these instruments are used, and the more their kinds are multiplied and they are prepared by the craftsman, the quicker they are for their operation, and higher among men, because of their quantity.
Therefore do not despise any instrument from them, but let it be prepared by you. For the necessity of them is inexcusable.
Chapter Seventy-Eight.
Concerning the Extraction of the Afterbirth.
When the afterbirth is retained at childbirth, then it is necessary that you order the weak woman to retain her breath. Then have her lie down and strain as if she were constipated; and compress your hand over her mouth and her nostrils. If therefore it comes out through this, it is good.
If not: then take a jar and make a hole in its lid; and put into it herbs that open the mouth of the womb, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, dill, cinnamon cassia, and centaury; take all these herbs or some of them, and submerge them with water, and put them over fire.
Then place a reed tube over the hole of the jar's lid and the other end into the mouth of the womb; and let her hold it until the vapor reaches the cavity of the womb.
Then make her breathe deeply, as we have said. For then it will exit easily.
But if it remains after this treatment and does not exit: then order the midwife to immerse her hand in oil of sesame, or hollyhock mucilage. Then let her introduce it into the vulva and search for the secundina with it. And when she has found it, then let her take hold of it and gradually draw it out.
But if it is attached deep within the uterus, then let her insert her hand, as we have described, until she finds the secundina and gradually draw it out according to its straightness so that the uterus does not fall due to a strong pull; indeed, it is necessary for it to be moved with ease to the right and left sides; then add to the amount of traction. For then it obeys and is preserved and comes loose from its adhesion.
But if the mouth of the uterus is constricted, as we have already described: treat it with sneezing and a medicine from a pot with herbs.
But if it does not exit with all that we have described, then be careful not to tire yourself out by repeatedly attempting the extraction.
Rather, it is necessary that what comes out at the mouth of the uterus be tied to the woman's thigh. Then give her an enema with the tetrapharmacon ointment. For it will putrefy it after a few days and dissolve it so that it exits.
However, when it putrifies, a foul odor rises from it to the stomach and head and harms a weak one. Therefore, suitable fumigations must be administered for that.
Some of the ancients who are already experienced have used the fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which a woman is smoked at the retention of the secundines and menses.
Let it be made of glass like an alembic or of pewter; and let the wide end be placed over the fire; and let the smoking be set upon coals; let her hold it until that smoking is consumed; and repeat another.
Chapter LXXIX.
Concerning the cure of an unperforated anus.
Many boys are born, and their anuses are not perforated, which a subtle suture has already closed. Therefore, it is necessary that the midwife perforate that suture with her finger; and if not, let her perforate it with a sharp spatulim; and let her beware lest the laceration touch it.
Then place upon it wool steeped in wine and oil. Then cure it with ointments until it is healed.
But if you fear that it will close, then place a lead cannula in the foramen for many days, and remove it when the boy wants to defecate.
And now it happens that closure of the anus also occurs from consolidation of a wound or an abscess. Therefore, let that consolidation be cut, then let it be cured with what we said from the cure and lead.
Chapter LXXX.
Concerning the Cure of Fistulas Which Occur in the Lower Part.
Fistulas which occur in the lower part are nodulations and swellings which occur near the anus externally; or in the space of one part; and there is one fistula or several.
When that nodulation becomes old, it opens, and a watery moisture, white, or subtle pus flows from it.
And sometimes these fistulas are penetrating. Therefore penetrating ones are recognized by this, that it flows out from defecation and flatulence, when the sick person uses defecation; and perhaps a worm flows out from them.
And they are fistulas when they are penetrating into space as far as the bladder and as far as the urethra. And they are penetrating as far as the junction of the hip, and as far as the node of the tailbone.
From that which is known of a penetrating fistula to the anus, even from one that is not penetrating, it is, that you insert your index finger into the anus and insert a slender probe into the fistula from metal or iron when there is no tortuosity.
But if there is tortuosity in it, then insert into it a slender probe from lead or a hair from horse hairs until you feel the probe or hair on your finger.
But if you do not feel it deeply, nor does anything proceed from the opening by way of excretion, nor flatulence, nor worm as I said: then know that it is non-penetrating; hasten therefore to treatment.
And when a fistula is penetrating as far as the bladder or as far as the urethra: then its indication is the discharge of urine from it and the prohibition of it from this so that the place may be consolidated with medicine.
But if it is penetrating as far as the junction of the hip or as far as the acetabulum, then its sign is that a probe reaches there if there is no tortuosity in it up to the opening and the discovery of pain in the surrounding area and that pus always issues from it: and that medication is ineffective in it nor does it consolidate with ointment.
And in all these penetrating fistulas there is no cure at all: and the treatment of them is labor and vanity for a foolish physician upon whom it is inflicted.
But in that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing is hoped for with a knife according to what I tell you and I have already proven: and it is, that the sick person lies between your hands on his back and raise his legs up above his hips and let his hips be inclined towards his belly. Then introduce a lead probe, or one of air, if there is twisting in the fistula, until you know where the probe reaches.
But if he feels it weak around the anus, then it is necessary that you insert your index finger into the anus.
If therefore you feel the probe already penetrated through itself, beyond which you feel between your finger and it, or flesh: then you know for sure that it is penetrating: do not therefore labor on it, because it is not its healing, as we said.
They however said, that the flesh is healed in some men, and from the medication for which he hopes for benefit, it is, to ignite a subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as precedes, and to introduce it ignited into the fistula, until it reaches around the anus. Then repeat that twice, or three times until you know, that all those added filtered flesh, which are similar to a bird's quill pen, have now been burned.
Then care for it with linen cloths wrapped in butter, until those burned flesh depart: then care for it with ointments generating flesh and consolidating.
If therefore it heals, it is good.
And if not, then it never heals with any other treatment.
And if the probe exits and does not reach your finger which is in the anus, and there is a thick membrane of flesh or sifac between it and the probe: and you see the fistula following the surface of the skin, then cut the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you will cut with the probe what is in the fistula, until the section reaches where the extremity of the probe arrives, and the probe is freed and falls.
Then clean those filtered flesh, which are assimilated to a bird's quill pen, so that nothing remains from them.
If, however, blood overcomes you and dissolves between you and your operation so that you sever those flesh: then it is better, and quicker relief, to cauterize it with fire or with a sharp medicine.
Because a cautery with fire gathers good qualities, it adds burning of those added flesh and cutting off blood and drying up moistures.
Then care for it with linen wrapped in butter or chopped stalks until the place emits pus and those burnt flesh go out into the pus.
Then care for then the wound with hardening ointments, those that produce hard flesh: and there are medicines in which are astringency and drying.
For when they are restored, then they already heal: and you do not fear repetition.
But if the fistula has already reached to the depth of the anus and is elongated from excess of the body: then insert your finger into the anus and inquire with it.
If therefore you feel a probe and between you and it there is a membrane of fat or flesh and it is near penetration: then there is no operation on it except according to the way of trust and hope.
Which is because it is administered in it one of three ways: either that you cauterize it itself as we said or that you cut it until you reach its cavity so that it is possible for you to insert linen and care from next. And do not proceed much with the cutting so that you do not fall into the sphincter containing the anus and it happens to the weak a discharge of excretion without will. Then care for it with what we said.
Perhaps it will heal or you lengthen the membrane itself and cleanse it after you dry it up to near the anus as we said either with a probe or with another instrument of sharp extremity. Then cleanse those filtered flesh that are in the cutting up to where you can with examination.
Then try to restore the whole wound with a section and an upper opening where it is consolidated, and there will remain an open fistula in the inner part of the anus, and it will be easier for the sick person.
And sometimes a fistula follows in this way: and it is when you insert a probe into the fistula: and it is on the side of the anus around the surface of the body with skin and the margin of the anus; then take a probe with a perforated end, which is like an awl of aleskef, that is, prepared leather, according to this form. And insert into it a thread wrapped from five threads, and around it. Then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
Therefore, if it is penetrating into the inner margin of the anus nearby, then pull the thread out of that hole: so that you insert your finger into the anus and pull out the end of the thread, and join the two ends together: and tighten both, and let it go for one or two days; and the more the thread falls into the flesh, tighten it well, until those pieces of flesh that are between the two ends of the thread fall off; then care for the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in any way that is prepared for you, unless it is very deep. For it is not fitting for you to do that because of a tear, lest you fall into it.
Then do as we said with it until it is healed.
The shape of a spathulated spine with which the fistula is divided, whose curvature is very sharp, and the other part is not sharp, so that it does not fall into what is not necessary, as you see.
Chapter LXXXI
On the stitching of hemorrhoids, from which blood runs from their incision: and the care of fissures.
There are hemorrhoids according to two types. For they are either within the anus, similar to bladders of coals or prunes; or as if they themselves are grains of a bean. And from them are small ones and large ones: and blood runs from them always, and it is one, and there are many. And they are outside the anus, and at its extremities.
But these which are outside the anus are according to most few in moisture, from which runs a yellow water, or little blood with a constant flow; and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment of that which is within the anus is, that you command the sick person to sit: and it should be pressed until the anus emerges, and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Therefore suspend them with hooks; or hold them with your fingernail. Then cut into them at their roots.
But if hooks are not retained in them because of their moisture and softness: then take them with a rough cloth, or with a swab made from double wool, and draw them out with your fingers. Then cut into them, and sprinkle over them after the incision certain hot powders, so that they stand in place of a cautery. Or cauterize them according to what preceded in the chapter on cauterization. Then treat them with the remaining treatment until they are healed.
But if the anus does not yield to protrusion, then give the sick person an enema in which there is a little mordant, so that it washes with what is in the anus, and yields to protrusion quickly when the sick person strains.
But if the hemorrhoids are external from the anus, then their matter is light, easy: and it is like you should take them with your fingernail or take them with a hook, and cut into them. Then care for them with what we have said until they are healed.
And whoever recoils from incision with a knife, then it is necessary that you administer their suture in this manner. Take an unraveled thread and insert it into the eye of a needle. Then draw the thread upward and make it penetrate with the needle at its root on one side; and entwine the two ends of the thread in the lower part of the needle, so that they are parallel; and tighten the thread with a strong knot. Then tie the thread and withdraw the needle.
Do this with all the threads, and leave one out of them; do not draw it tight so that excess blood may run from it.
Then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or carrot juice on top of it and put it over the wound; and instruct the patient to rest. Then leave him until it falls off.
When therefore the threads fall off, care for them with ointments and the remaining treatment until they are healed.
Concerning the Care of Fisures. For they often happen from the drying up of feces and constriction of nature.
When therefore they become hardened and medicine does not work in them; then it is necessary that you scrape them with a spatula point or with your fingernail until they become moist and the upper layer which prevents them from consolidating is removed. Then care for them until they consolidate as needed.
But if they do not consolidate; then repeat them with a more vigorous scraping than the first, until they bleed much and are flayed, then care for them until they are healed.
Concerning the Treatment of Hemorrhoids Inverted and Not Inverted; and Threads Dry and Ants.
Chapter 82.
Know that a hemorrhoid is nothing but a round knot according to the color of the body, similar to the head of a nail; and it happens throughout the body, especially in the lower parts of the feet and fingers; and pain arises from them upon walking.
Therefore it is necessary that what is in the circumference of the clavicle be cut and be held with forceps, or with a hook, and be eradicated from its root.
Then take care of that; and if you wish, cauterize it according to what preceded in its chapter.
But from the dried athel one is a small eminence, rough, filtered, round above the surface of the body. And they often occur in the hands of boys.
And its treatment is, that you extend the athel, and cut it; or you tie it with silk thread; or with a hair until it falls off. And if you wish, cauterize it according to what was previously mentioned with fire, or with a sharp medicine; and now inverted athel are eradicated, and those not inverted with the instrument that I shall say.
Furthermore, a formica is also a small filtered eminence, thick, above the surface of the body, going deep; and when it finds cold, it feels like a ant bite and spreads throughout the body; and most of it occurs in the hands.
And its treatment is that you take a cannula from a goose feather, or a strong vulture feather; and place the cannula over the formica until the circle of the cannula contains its parts. Then revolve your hand with the cannula until you cut what is in the circumference of the formica; and place it deep into the flesh, and eradicate the formica from its root.
And if you wish, do that with a cannula of air, or iron, according to this form.
Let the upper part of the cannula be drawn upward and covered, so that the apprehension on it is relieved and its rotation itself.
And if you wish, cauterize the formica according to what was previously mentioned in the cauterization of the athel in the chapter on cauterization.
Chapter Eighty-Three.
Of the forms of instruments which are employed for fistulas in diseases of the anus, and opening of the abdomen, and colic.
Sometimes an enema is made of silver, or of brass, or of cast bronze, or hammered.
And sometimes it is made of these instruments small and large, according to those in which they are administered.
Therefore that which is administered in the healing of very young children should be small; and those whose anuses are weak, or painful, so too their enemas.
A large enema.
The cane of it, that is, the upper head in which the bladder is tied, should be wide according to this manner; and let there be a distinction so that the bladder is tied as you see, and the lower extremity which is introduced into the anus should be deaf, that is, not open, smooth, very drawing towards subtlety: and on one side of it let there be two holes, and on the other side one hole.
And let the width of the hole be according to the thickness of the rays, and a little thicker; and let the bladder in which the medicines are placed be from an animal's bladder: or from sheepskin parchment, which should be according to the form of a small wineskin: whose root is one palm.
And let it be perforated with many holes as it is turned, and the space which is between every hole should be the thickness of a finger. Then insert into those holes a strong thread from raw silk, which should be from ten threads or thereabouts, and join it with a bladder like a wineskin. When therefore the bladder is placed in it, tie it tightly in the head of the enema between two distinct constrictions. Then administer the enema with it.
And this is the shape of the circle bladders here depicted and their holes.
The quality of giving an enema with it is: to fill a syringe or bladder from medicine which is warmed according to the amount tolerated by the sick person; and be careful that it is not very hot or very cold.
Then the sick person is laid on their back and raises their legs upwards; and put underneath them a mattress, that is, skin on which people lie, or a sheet.
Then smear the end of the enema with oil, or with egg white, or with fenugreek mucilage, or similar things. Then insert it into the anus easily. Then let the attendant grasp the syringe with both hands together and squeeze it forcefully until they have emptied everything that is in the enema into the intestines.
Then withdraw the enema, and let the sick person raise their legs to the wall.
And if the medicine compels them to defecate, then they should hold it as long as they can. And if they sleep with it all night, it is better for healing.
But if you give an enema to them in illnesses of abdominal dropsy, and their defecation is hurried; then repeat the enema until they are healed.
But if there are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses in the anus, then let the enema be very subtle and gentle, from the enemas with which children are given enemas.
And this is the form of a subtle enema for when the skin is tight.
Chapter 84.
I have already said in the division on the treatment of wounds what was appropriate for the book, and I will say here their treatment with the hand and with medicines according to supplementation.
Therefore I say that wounds are diversified according to what they are done by and according to the place on which the wound falls.
Therefore, the things by which wounds are often made are like the throwing of a stone: or a cut with a sword, or a knife; or a blow with a spear, or wood, or an arrow; and similar things from many objects.
But wounds which are made according to the parts of the body are like a wound that falls on the head, or neck, or chest, or belly, or thigh; and similar ones from those limbs.
And I am relating the treatments of some wounds so that I may put this reasoning and rule over the remaining wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds; because the recollection of compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say. When a simple wound occurs on the head and there is no fracture of the bone; then consider if it is from the throw of a stone, or things similar to it, and has already broken only the skin; and the wound is large, and you fear for a bad outcome of hot abscess; then hurry and perform a cephalic phlebotomy immediately; and do not delay it; and draw out blood from him according to the quantity of his strength: if there is nothing forbidding phlebotomy, especially if the blood that comes out from the wound is little. And let the phlebotomy be from the opposite side of the wounded part.
And let the phlebotomy be from the opposite side of the wounded part. And let the sick person beware for himself against repletion, and wine, and coarse foods.
But if something forbids reduction, then let him reduce from food, and not approach meats, nor wines.
And put on the wound if a hot abscess happens to him, cotton infused in rose oil alone, or with wine in which there is astringency.
But if you are safe from a hot abscess, then put on the wound, if it is fresh with its own blood and has not been changed by air, the powder which I will relate a little later: and if it has already been changed by air, then put on it certain ointments until it heals.
But if the wound is large, or is from a cut by a sword, and similar weapons: and the lips thereof do not come together by stitches, then join it with suture, according to what I shall relate about wounds of the belly and their suturing.
But if the wound has already been torn from the bone, and hangs down, and there is no retention of it except in a small suspensory, then cut it. Then treat the wound with medicines, and restore hard flesh in it in place of the skin, and instruct the sick person to nourish themselves with foods which have substance, such as heads, and cooked wheat, until they are plump; and those similar.
And if you find putrefaction in the skin, and it does not adhere to the bone: then cut out all the putrefaction, and throw it away; then treat that [area].
But if in these wounds there is an artery, or vein from which blood flows: and it is not severed by medicines, then inquire above the artery. If therefore you find it not cut, then cut it with a Spatula, or tie it off. But if necessity compels when that which we said does not apply, then cauterize it until the blood is severed.
But if these wounds are small, simple, then their matter is easy, light: so that you sprinkle on them this powder: because it will consolidate them before they change in the air.
Method of Making Incarnated Powder. Take one part of frankincense, and two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unquenched lime: mix the whole well, and sift it; and fill the wound from it, and constrict it with a good constriction until it adheres well upon it, and coagulates with the blood.
Then constrict it from above with stitches, and leave it alone; and do not loosen it until it remains, so that it does not discharge. For it is not eradicated by medicine until it is healed.
And sometimes lime alone does this when you do not have frankincense at hand, and dragon's blood also makes the same operation in many large wounds, when it is suitable to put it on them and bind them up, and they are recent wounds with their own blood which has not been changed by air.
But if the air has already changed it somewhat, especially when it is in the summer season, then the application of this powder is not in order; therefore care for it with what we have said, so that you put on it certain digestive ointments: or put on it poultices made from barley flour, made with water and honey, until they discharge pus. Then care for the rest with further treatment until they are healed.
But if it should happen that a fracture occurs in the bone with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with forceps; and I will already say the treatment of skull fractures in what is to come.
Of wounds of the neck.
But if a wound should happen in the neck, then there is no difference in its treatment and that of a head wound when it is simple.
But if a nerve or artery of the neck has already been cut: then if it is a nerve, there is no remedy for it except that its treatment be joined with that which produces strong astringency, such as alum and saffron, and those similar to them. For they injure nerves and contract them.
And do not put anything cold at all on the wound; for the substance of nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is more sublime than other members; and let that with which it is treated be from mild medicines, such as lime slaked with fresh water repeatedly infused with oil, or with rose oil, and tutty when washed also with fresh water: and the remaining mineral stones in this manner, and soft ointments.
If, however, the wound is large, then apply a suture; or bring its lips together with lint. Then care for it until it heals.
But if the wound has depth, or a sinus occurs in its lower part, in which pus already collects, then perforate it in a more depressed place within it.
But if an artery has already been incised in the wound and its flow of blood follows: then separate or cauterize it, and bind it; or cauterize it, if necessity compels it to be done so.
But if the spondyles of the throat have already fallen, or the whole thing, and the alhaudig are saved: then join the lips of the skin with a suture over the trachea, and do not touch the throat, rather equalize it, and return it to its natural form. Then constrict it with a decent ligature, and leave it for several days. Then care for it with ointments which have astringency and desiccation, until it heals.
But if the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then explore it: then if there are fragments of bone in it, extract them all, or as many as you can from them; and what is not prepared, leave it until the wound putrifies, and separates and relieves its exit.
But if the wound is recent, then sprinkle over it the powder which I have described. But if bone appears to be seen in the wound and a fistula is formed: then treat it with what its recollection comes to in its chapter.
On a Wound on the Fingers.
If there is a strike from a spear or knife and you see its depth, then consider it. But if windiness comes out from the wound, when a weak person breathes from it, then know that the wound is mortal.
If it is not deep, and fresh with its own blood, then do not put powder on it from the first hour, nor bind it up, so that the blood may not be retained in its depth, and return to the heart, and kill the sick man; but apply an attractive ointment to it, and dissolve it twice a day.
But if you do not have ointment at hand, then put an old rag in the opening of the wound, so that it may draw out what comes forth from it of moistures; and make the sick man sleep upon the wound, so that what is gathered in it may flow.
But if three days or more have already passed since the wound, and there does not happen to the sick man spasm, nor evil trembling of the heart, nor constriction in breathing, and you see the remaining dispositions of his are good: then know that the wound is well. Therefore take care of it with dressings, and other treatment, until it heals.
But if its healing is excused, and it is now always open, then know that a fistula has already been made. Therefore take care of it from its own chapter.
And if the wound is from a cut of a sword, or knife, and it is simple on the surface of the chest, or back: then take care of it with what preceded from suture, if it is large; or with powder, if it is small.
But if it has already made an impression on the bone, and chips come out of it: then examine the wound, and hurry to extract those chips, if they are separate. But if they are not separate, then leave them until the wound putrifies, for their extraction is alleviated then.
But judgment in the treatment of other accidents of wounds in the remaining limbs is the judgment that we have said.
Concerning wounds of the belly, and the exiting of intestines, and their issue.
Disruption which occurs in the abdomen is great, medium, and small.
From a great disruption, therefore, sometimes intestines or a number of intestines protrude.
Therefore their introduction is made, and their suture more vehement and difficult.
And even a small disruption is difficult in another way. It therefore follows that their reduction is more difficult if you do not hasten in introducing them to their place immediately; because it swells, opens, and enlarges; therefore its entry becomes difficult.
Because of this, therefore, a medium disruption is better; because with it the reduction of the intestine is not difficult as it becomes difficult in these two species.
Know that the suture of a vein is according to four methods.
Two sutures are common and apply to the suture of the abdomen, and to the suture of other wounds of the body; and two other sutures specifically pertain to the remaining wounds. However, they are more appropriate with the suture of the abdomen; and I will explain each one to you with description and explanation.
I say, therefore, that when a wound is small, and something protrudes from it out of the intestine, and it is difficult to reduce it; then this is due to one of two methods. Either because of the smallness of the disruption, as we have said; or because there is inflation in the intestine because of the cold air.
When therefore it is so, then you must warm it, so that you submerge a sponge or cloth moistened in lukewarm water alone. Or you boil in water fennel, papyrus, and saffron and embrace the intestine with it until the inflation is resolved.
Sometimes it makes wine in which there is astringency; and it is better than water alone in resolving inflation.
When therefore you see the swelling already resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which marshmallow or mullein has been boiled. For through that its entrance is eased with a small thing.
But if its return is excused after this treatment, then make a small incision in the disruption with the instrument with which hemorrhoids are cut.
And the first treatment is better when it is prepared than a section; and compulsion is not made to cut after necessity and lack of instrument.
Let one part of it be twisted and sharp, and the other part not sharp, and let the subtle end not be with the subtlety of a spatula, rather let it be somewhat duller: and it is that which resembles a chisel, as you see.
When therefore the wound is enlarged and enters the intestine, then it is necessary that there be a reduction of it according to its own natural form in its proper place, if possible above it: for it is better.
When, however, the disruption is wide in the lower part of the belly: then it is necessary that you make the sick person lie on his back and put his legs higher than his head. And if it is in the upper part of the belly, then put his head and chest higher than his lower parts.
And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then put your intention and your consideration always on this, that the part in which the wound is be higher than the other part.
And thus it is necessary that you administer it in large wounds and in middle wounds.
But in small wounds, put it according to what is prepared for you.
Then make a pious minister be present between your hands who will hold the whole disruption with his hand and bring together its lips. Then uncover from it for him who follows a suture something after something; and this is the way of a common single suture.
And take a needle, or a sharp-pointed instrument, according to the size of the wound. Then let fall from the extremity of the disruption the width of a ring finger, that is, of a physician; and fix the needle one span beyond what you are about to introduce the thread into it in two places at the skin, with two extremities of sifac which is under the skin from within, until you make it penetrate from the other side, and you have now joined the two extremities of the skin and the two extremities of sifac; and there become four rows.
Then tighten with a double thread around the needle several times on both sides at once, until the two lips of the wound are joined in a decent manner.
Then let fall the width of a finger also, and fix another needle into them; then draw it tight with thread, just as you did with the first needle. Therefore do not cease doing that with as many needles as you need until you complete the constriction of the whole wound.
And let the needles be of a medium size between thickness and thinness; for thin needles pierce the flesh very quickly, and thick ones are difficult to insert into the skin; therefore it is necessary that they should be medium in thinness and thickness.
And it is not necessary that the needle be fixed in the two extremities of the skin very close together; lest the flesh be pierced quickly and the wound opened before its consolidation, and lest they also be elongated with the suture so as not to prevent the wound from consolidating.
Then cut off the ends of the needles so that they do not injure the sick man in his sleep; and put little tufts of cloth on all sides to hold the ends of the needles; and leave them until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And this indeed, kind of suture with needles thus is more suitable for small wounds. For it suffices in the suture of those, one needle, or two, or about that number.
The second suture is common, so that the aggregates with the suture join the four ends: two ends of the skin and two ends of the sifac in one stitch, with a needle in which is wrapped a thread equal in subtlety and thickness.
Then when you have penetrated with the needle these four ends, draw back the needle from the part where you began, so that the drawn thread falls from the upper part of the wound; so that the suture is like the suture of cloth by which cloths are tied, and place between every suture an amount of thickness less than a finger.
But men know this suture.
And with this suture I healed a wound that had happened to a man in his belly, who had been wounded with a knife, and the disruption of the wound was greater than one palm: and about two palms had come out from the intestines from the middle intestine, and the disruption was in the middle of the belly.
I therefore returned it after his bowels had stood outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
The wound was therefore consolidated in a space of about fifteen days; and I took care of it, and it was healed; and he lived after that for many years, converted to his own affairs.
And the physicians had judged that it would not be healed.
And from a miracle it was, that I did not care for it with ointment. For I was in a place where ointment was not found, nor anything of medicine. Therefore I put old linen over the wound twice a day, and I diligently washed it with honey water until it was healed.
But I shall tell two kinds of proper sutures according to the account of speech.
And it is, that you begin with a sharp suture; and you introduce the needle from the outer to the inner part.
When therefore the needle penetrates into the skin, and into the muscle going according to the length and breadth of the whole body: let the end of the sifac fall in the side in which you introduced the needle, and make the other end penetrate from the inner part to the outer part in the other end marvel.
When therefore you have made it to penetrate, then make it to penetrate thus in this same extremity, from the exterior part to the interior: and let go the extremity of the sifac, which is on this side, and make the point to penetrate into the other extremity from the interior part to the exterior; and make it to penetrate with your penetration that you make it to penetrate into the sifac extremity, which is in its part, until it penetrates into the whole.
Then begin also from this same side, and draw it up with the extremity which is from the sifac on the other side, and extract the point from the skin which it has penetrated.
Then return it to that skin, and draw the sifac extremity which is on the other side with this mirach extremity; and extract it from the skin which is from its part, and do that vice versa, one after another: and do that vice versa, until you have drawn out all its extrinsic part according to that example.
And the sum of this suture is that its suture should be like the sutures of skinners, so that its sifac vice versa on one side with one extremity of skin; and that you should let it go vice versa on the other side, until you complete it.
The second kind of proper suture, which Galen mentioned.
His speech is narrated so that its suture should be according to the similarity which some physicians have, in such a way that they bring together all the part to its fitting counterpart by nature: and they apply the sifac extremity to its other extremity, and the mirach extremity to its other extremity. And that is done according to what I tell you.
It is necessary that you fix the point into the mirach extremity nearest to you from the exterior part, and make it penetrate to the interior in that alone; and let go the two sifac extremities. Then turn the point, and make it penetrate from the exterior part to the interior into the two sifac extremities, namely on both sides.
Then turn both, and also make both penetrate from the inside to the outside, into the two extremities of the other side.
And this method of suture is better than the common easy suture, and it is the suture of which a reminder preceded.
This is therefore also the speech of Galen.
And some said. The suture of the belly is corrected with two needles. Which is, to insert one thread into both of them; and begin with the insertion of the needle, from what is at your side, and make it penetrate up to the other side, according to the suture of those who are skins equally.
And know that when the disruption is in the middle of the belly, then its suture is more difficult than that of the other places of the belly.
But the judgment of the medication of a wound, is the judgment of other wounds.
Which is, because when you obtain a fresh wound with its own blood, before the air changes it; and you reduce the intestine, and its own, and fit it; then place powder of incarnating on top.
But if the air has already changed the wound: then place some ointments, which are present to you, on top of it until they make pus; and the threads fall off, and the sifac and mirach become consolidated. Then take care of it as is the care of other wounds, until it is healed.
But if medicines are not present to you, then immediately place on it, from which it begins to emit pus, old cot; and change it twice a day, as I taught you, until it is healed.
For you do not need other medication in many dispositions, when the wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound communicates to the principal members in injury, then it is necessary for you to immerse soft wool in oil of tempered heat, or in rose oil; and place it in the circumference of the places which are between the groins, and under the armpits.
If he feels pain, or pricking, or putrefaction in his bowels (for this often happens) then give him an enema with dark, thick, warm wine; especially if the putrefaction has already reached the intestine and is about to penetrate to its cavity.
And know that what is from the large intestine is easier to heal; and what is from the small intestines is harder to heal.
But the intestine which is called Jejunum does not admit healing from a wound that happens in it at all; and this is because of its multitude, which is of veins, and their size, and because of the subtlety of its body, and the proximity of its nature to nerves.
But if what proceeds from the wound is a protuberance, and you obtain it fresh; reduce it according to your reduction, by which you reduce intestines equally.
But if a space has passed for it, and it has already become green, or black; then it is necessary that you tie it with thread above the place which has been darkened from it, so that flow of blood does not occur. For in a protuberance are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament, and put two ends of the thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside it; so that relief comes upon you from its attraction, and extraction of itself in case of the protuberance, and emission of pus from the wound.
Recollection of a Wound That Happens in the Intestine.
When a rupture occurs in the intestine and it is small; then it is possible that it may be restored in some people: therefore, because I have seen one who was wounded in his belly with a thrust of a spear, and the wound was from the right of the stomach, and the wound was old; and a fistula was made, and there issued from it discharge, and flatulence.
Therefore I applied treatment until I was no longer anxious about its healing; nor did I cease to dress it carefully until it was healed and the place consolidated.
After I saw the place was already consolidated, I feared for the sick man, lest some evil accident should befall him in his belly; and no such evil accident befell him. And he remained in a better state of health, eating and drinking, and sleeping soundly, and he entered the bath, and exercised himself in his daily routines.
And certain experimenters have now said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and is small, then it ought to be ligated in this manner. And it is, that you should take ants of large heads. Then bring together the two lips of the wound and place one ant with an open mouth upon the two lips of the wound. When its head is thus upon them and it clenches its jaws, cut off its head; for it adheres and will not be loosened.
Then place another ant near the first and do not cease to do this with ant after ant according to the total extent of the wound.
Then bind it up and its wound. For those heads will remain attached within the intestine until the intestine is nourished and healed, and no harm will befall the sick man inwardly.
And it is now possible that the intestine may also be ligated with a fine thread; which has been drawn out from the intestine of an animal and attached to it after it has been introduced into a needle.
And it is, that you should take the end of this thread from the intestine and it should be scraped off very much. Then tie a fine linen thread around its end. Then insert that thread into a needle and sew the intestine with it. Then bind it up in its dressing.
And this method of suture with thread and gut is not except according to the way of trust and hope.
Know that a wound which is large, wide, especially if it is in one of the slender intestines: then there is no skill except refinement, and there is no healing of it at all.
On the treatment of fistulae and ulcers.
Know that every wound or abscess when it grows old and becomes chronic, and becomes an ulcer, and does not consolidate, and emits pus always, and is not cut off: then it is called universally wherever it may be a fistula, and we call it a zulchemen.
And a fistula indeed is according to truth a knotted filtration, hard, white: with which there is no pain, which has the concavity of a bird's feather: and on account of that some call it risata, that is, a feather.
And it is in certain hours moist, which emits pus. And perhaps the moisture is split in certain hours. And sometimes this moisture is much, and is little: and it is thick, and it is subtle.
And I already stated previously in the division, then when I said wounds, that every ulcer which does not heal, nor is flesh born in it, it is not except because of one of nine new causes.
Of which one is, either because of the scarcity of blood in the body; or because of its malice; or because between it and on its lips there is hard flesh, prohibiting the birth of flesh; or because it is full of much filth and dirtiness; or because the ulcer in itself is putrid, and the material which is sent to it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is unsuitable in its treatment; or because corruption falling into the region is a pestilential kind; or through a property in the region, as happens in Caesaraugusta: in which digestion of illnesses becomes difficult, and healing of abscesses is delayed by nature; or because there is one bone, or a number of bones in it.
And I have already shown all these causes and their signs, and their treatments with medicines in the division; and it is necessary here for me to make you know the treatment of Fistula and Zuken, which is done by way of operation with the hand.
Therefore know that Fistula occurs in all the members of the body. For from them are Fistulas which reach the large veins and arteries, or nerves, or sinews; or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to one of the ribs: or to one of the vertebrae of the back, or to one of the joints composed of composition; such as the hand, and foot: and from them are those which go to the proximity of the principal member, and similar ones.
Which therefore of these Fistulas is in this way, is from illnesses difficult of healing, and does not receive treatment, and occupation with it is toil and ignorance.
But if it is from Fistulas some of whose depth does not reach these places which I said: and you hope, and trust in its treatment, and wish to arrive at the knowledge of it, then take a probe of bronze, or iron, if the Fistula tends according to straightness, and explore it with it.
But if there is crookedness in the Fistula, then investigate it with a probe of thin lead. For lead because of the gentleness of its body is relieved, and curves around the crookedness.
But if the Fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to indicate over it with a probe. Therefore cleanse from them an opening out of its openings.
For the moisture with which you cleanse it, goes towards the other openings, and runs from them.
Then carefully inquire according to what way it is possible for you: that you may know that there is a bone, or nerve, and the Fistula's concavity is distant, or near: or that the Fistula is single which has many openings, and stand upon all of it, with your utmost strength: with inquiry on your part, by which you question the sick person, and discovery of pain at pressure with your hand upon the place, and similar ones from signs and causes happening to a boil.
When therefore you have stood upon all these true stations, then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is, that you consider then, if there is a fistula nearby apparent, or in a safe place far from the joint, or from a nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places which I told you: then cut the fistula according to what has been said in my narration, and remove what is in it from filtration, and corrupt flesh, which is born in its orifice from flesh, or thelul, and similar things: and care for it until it heals.
But if the fistula is of distant depth, and is according to straightness: then it is necessary that you cut it deeply as much as is possible for you. Then cleanse it from all its corrupt flesh.
Then administer linen wrapped in sharp medicines: and insert it up to the concavity of the fistula which you comprehended with iron: do this repeatedly with it until the sharp medicine corrodes all that remains in the concavity of the fistula from corruption.
Then restore it with ointments which generate healthy flesh until it heals.
But if it does not heal through that, then cauterize it according to what we have narrated.
Therefore if the cause of the fistula is a bone, and it is made certain to you: then inquire into it and cut it according to what I have narrated to you: if nothing prevents you from a vein, or nerve, or main member as we said.
If therefore the bone is revealed to you, and there is something of corruption and blackness in it: then scrape it until all its corruption is removed. Then care for it with that which makes flesh upon it until it heals.
But if it does not heal and emits pus as it was doing: then know that you have not reached the total eradication of the corruption.
Therefore reveal it again, and make a careful examination of it, and cleanse it with your ultimate strength.
Then restore it yourself. Therefore if it heals, it is good; and if not, then you will know that corruption is deep within the body, which you have not reached. Therefore there is no skill for you in it except to leave it to nature.
But if the mouth of a young child is corrupted and it is possible for you, draw it out with fine forceps suited to it.
But if there are many bones, then make a careful drawing out of them all, and do not leave anything behind with your strength.
But if something opposes you from the humors and there is no fear or mistake in cutting them: then cut into those humors and flesh if they are there and free the bones.
But if you do not have preparation for taking out the bones at your time, then place over the wound what will cause it to decay itself; and leave it until that which is around those bones decays from flesh and humors.
And see that the wound does not solidify. And let the incision which you made in your operation be tightened. Rather place over it, if you fear, a cloth steeped in sulfur ground with oil; or a cloth steeped in Egyptian ointment, or some emerald ointments.
For when those humors decay and separate from the bones, removal and their drawing out are eased.
But if there is one large bone, such as the bone of the leg or the hip bone and similar to these, and what is corrupted from it is a large part; then scrape it with the last resort until that blackness and corruption are removed. Then restore the wound.
But if what is corrupted in it is a large part and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to saw it and cut it all the way to the place where the corruption has reached; then care for it until it heals.
And I tell you about a man who had a wound on his leg: so that you may take it as an example and aid for your operation.
There was a young man of about thirty years old, to whom pain occurred in his leg from a cause which had moved upon him within the body, that is, from within; until the matter reached his leg and there formed a large abscess: and he did not have an external cause.
Time was extended with him in error of the physicians until the abscess was opened and much matter flowed from it. And his treatment was postponed until his leg became fistulated and many openings were made in it; which all emitted pus and the body's humors.
Many physicians treated him for about two years, and there was no one wise in the art of the hand among them until I was called upon and saw his leg and the materials which were flowing from those openings with a great flow: indeed, the whole body of the man had already wasted away, and his color was citron.
Therefore I introduced a probe into one of the openings and it reached the bone.
Then I examined all the openings and found that they reached each other from all parts of the leg.
I hastened then and cut above one of those openings until I exposed a part of the bone; and I found it corrupted, which had already been corroded and blackened, and putrefied, and was perforated until it penetrated to the marrow.
I sawed off what was revealed to me and prepared it from the corrupted bone.
And I determined that there was nothing in the bone except that corruption which I had cut off and sawed. And now I had eradicated it.
Then I placed the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicines over a long space. And it did not consolidate.
Then I probed and found above the second opening, above the first discovery, a continuous corruption with bone; and I sawed what appeared to me also from that corruption.
Then I tried its restoration. And it was not restored.
Therefore I discovered above it again and did not cease to cut the bone into pieces and try its restoration; and it was not restored until I cut about a palm from the bone and extracted it with its marrow.
Then I restored it with medications and it quickly consolidated and healed; and this iteration was not necessary in its operation and section except for the weakness of the sick person's constitution, and his lack of tolerance, and my fear for him regarding death: because he suffered from evil syncopes in all hours from excess evacuation.
He was therefore healed with complete healing; and firm flesh grew in place of the bone, and a good arrangement was made in his body, and his strength returned; and he returned to his former conditions; and it did him no harm at all in walking.
But if the protruding bone in the body is already broken, then it is necessary to saw it according to this method; and it is: to take a ligament and tie it at the end of the protruding bone; and instruct someone to extend it upward; and put another ligament made of coarse wool after the first ligament. Then tie it over the flesh which is under the bone and extend its extremity so that you draw the flesh downwards; and you expose the flesh above the place which you wish to saw so that the saw does not injure the flesh.
Place wood or a board under the bone below decently; because when you do this, it is not prevented from cutting the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that the saw be over the corrupted place for a short time so that there is no corruption in the hollow of the bone; and it does not appear to the sense in its appearance and compels it to the vice of its own juice.
If the mouth is corrupted and is not prominent but continues with its part, and the corruption is in its middle or in a part of it, then expose all the flesh from all sides. Then place wood underneath.
Then saw it from the first part, where the corruption is, until the saw continues on the other side; and let the saw be according to the length of the corruption a little further, as we have said.
But if the corruption is at the junction, cut the corrupt junction itself, and saw the mouth where it continues on the other side.
But if the corruption is in the continuation of two junctions, then there is no artifice in it except abrasion.
But if the corruption is in the comb of the hand or in the comb of the foot, then the matter is very difficult. But it is necessary for you to inquire how the corruption appears to you. And abrade it and cleanse it according to whatever arrangement is possible for you, and with whatever artifice is rectified for you: when it does not cause opposition to you by vein or nerve.
And know that there are many cutting and sawing instruments for cutting these bones, according to the position of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and subtlety, and magnitude, and smallness, and hardness, and rarity. Therefore it is necessary that you prepare an instrument suitable for that operation of every species.
And know that these operations signify to you above the kind of instrument with which you are in need when you have a long study. And the knowledge of the methods of this art is a testimony to the methods of illnesses; for then you will already find by yourself what suits it from the instruments for every infirmity.
And I affirm to you in the last of this chapter a number of instruments which you put examples on which you cut and a test by which you try on others.
Shape of another Saw.
Shape of a Scraper for Joining. Let the head of this scraper be according to the form of the head of a star-shaped nail; and let its points be according to the form of the points of an elishegife.
And it is not fitting except that the heads of joins be rubbed with it when they are corrupted or when a wide and large mouth is present.
Shape of a Larger Scraper.
Shape of a Wide Scraper.
Shape of a Scraper in which there is a Concavity.
Shape of another subtle Scraper.
Shape of another scraper with a curved extremity.
Shape of a small, subtle tenaculum scraper.
This resembles a Rasp, and its extremity is like a Saw: it is exhibited in many places for the reason of bones.
Shape of a scraper which suits the reason of that which is perforated from bones.
Its extremity is triangular, and its extremities are sharp.
It is made from India. And similarly it is necessary that all which we have said be made from Scrapers and Cutters and Saws.
On the incision of extremities and the Locking of Bones.
Extremities putrefy either from an external or internal cause.
When therefore you have treated that corruption with medical care, and the treatment does not help; and you see the corruption fall upon a limb which it does not affect: then it is necessary that you cut into that limb until you reach the corruption, so that the sick person may be delivered from death, or from the evil which is greater by the loss of the limb.
And the sign of this happening is that the limb becomes dark, until it seems as though fire has burned it, or it rots after the blackness: until that putrefaction is cut down to what follows that limb, and crawls into the whole body.
Therefore hasten with the incision of it, and similarly if the cause of the corruption is from the sting of certain venomous creatures: such as a sea scorpion, and viper, and asp, and the like.
If therefore the corruption, or sting is in the extremity of a finger, then cut into the finger, and do not allow space for the corruption to advance as far as the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it happens in the hand, then cut into it from the root of the forearm, and do not allow space for the corruption until it reaches the forearm.
And if it invades that, then cut into the arm at the elbow joint.
But if the corruption passes through, and you see it around the elbow: then death is upon the sick person. And besides that from treatment, the quantity of strength is to be administered.
And do similarly with the foot, when corruption invades a toe, then cut it at one of the joints: and if it seizes the arch of the foot, then cut into the whole foot. But if it ascends to the knee, then cut the leg at the knee joint.
And if the corruption has already reached above the knee, then there is no wisdom in it except dismissal, and to leave the sick person to death.
The manner of cutting a limb, or sewing it up, is to tie a ligature below the part you wish to cut and tie another ligature above the place. Let one assistant extend one ligature downwards, and let another assistant extend another ligature upwards. And you separate the flesh which is between the two ligatures with a broad Spatula, until all the flesh is exposed. Then it may be cut, or sewn up.
And you must place linen cloths on all sides, and let the saw not touch the healthy part; and it should happen that a weak additional injury is inflicted, and a warm poultice applied.
But if internal bleeding should happen while you are operating, then cauterize the place quickly: or put some powders that staunch blood upon it. Then return to your treatment until it is completed.
Then bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage for it, and care for it until it heals.
And I tell you that it happened to a man in his foot, the same accident that I am telling you about.
Which is because a blackness occurred in his foot, with a burn that resembles fire's combustion; and that corruption first happened in his toe, until it began to affect the whole foot.
Therefore the man hastened from himself, after he saw the corruption cutting into his limb with its violence, which he found out from the pain and the burning of it; and he cut it at the joint, and was healed.
And after a long time had passed for him, that same corruption happened to him in the index finger of his hand.
He therefore came to me, and I tried to recover that excess with what I put on his hand from medicines after the cleansing of his body; and the excess was not repelled, and it began to advance into another finger: until the corruption began in the hand.
He therefore called upon me to cut his hand; and I refused to do so, hoping that excess superfluity might pass from him on its own: and I also feared for him, lest he should die at the incision of his hand. For the man's strength was beyond the case.
When therefore he despaired of me, he returned to his own land; and it was reported to me concerning him that, hastening, he fell upon his whole hand, and he was healed.
And I have not related this narrative except that it may be a help concerning what falls upon the nature of this illness; and that it may be a sign by which it is signified, and according to which it is acted.
On the Treatment of Sinuses, and the Quality of Clysters with Medicines.
When an abscess occurs in certain fleshy members and the space of the abscess extends until it collects pus; then it bursts or is perforated, and what is in it issues forth as pus, and a vacant place remains as if it were a vessel: and the skin that is over it is like a cloth that has already been attenuated: and the corruption does not proceed to its final stage, nor does it press into the mouth, nor into a nerve, nor into a ligament; it deserves to be called a Sinus and not a Fistula. However, if the space of it extends until the corruption presses into any one of these members, then it is called a Fistula or a zuken.
And its treatment is to cut all that skin as it revolves; and especially when it has become attenuated and made like a cloth; and you trust because it does not adhere to the place on account of its corruption.
But if you hope that the skin will adhere and the last corruption does not follow from it; and if there is thickness in the skin from flesh, then treat it with a clyster; and it is, that you consider the Sinus.
Then if it is large, and the pus that is emitted from it is of a foul odor: then cleanse it with Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, and oil, and ziniar, taking equal parts, mix them in a vessel; and decoct them over fire until the medicine reddens; and comes to the thickness of honey.
Then take from it as much as you need; and dissolve it with water and honey, and cleanse the Sinus with it; and constrict its opening, and let the medicine remain in it for the space of two hours.
Then extract it with pressure; do this for as many days as necessary until the Sinus is cleansed and the foul odor is removed.
And sometimes cleanse with ash water, when you do not have this medicine present; and it is such that you should take ash from vine wood, or ash from holly wood; and pour water over it. Then strain it, and cleanse with it until you are confident that the Sinus is already cleansed.
And if the weak person cannot tolerate Egyptian medicine nor ash water, then cleanse it with water and honey, to which some crushed ziniar has already been mixed. Or cleanse it with honey and wine mixed together, since honey has the property of cleansing and washing; and wine makes the Sinus adhere, especially when there is an excess of astringency and dryness in the wine.
When you have done this several times, and are confident that the Sinus corruption has already been removed; then cleanse it with something that promotes flesh growth in it.
And it is such that you should take some dyafinicon plaster; and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine; or cleanse it with certain medicines, and other ointments, the properties of which I have written in the treatise on ointments.
And if the opening of the Sinus is narrow, in which the enema cannula does not fit: then widen it a little with iron; or place in it a licorice root wrapped in Egyptian ointment, or basil ointment until it widens.
And similarly if the orifice is also wide, then bring together its lips with suture: and let out from it a quantity into which an enema may enter without addition.
And similarly if the orifice from which pus flows is raised upwards: then dry it up in a lower place which is in it so that pus may flow from it downwards: because pus when constricted in the depth of the sinus prevents flesh from being generated in it.
And if it is not possible for you to dry up the sinus approximately below it according to your wish: then try, so that you prepare the limb with preparation so that pus may flow from it easily according to how it is prepared for you. Try so that nothing of the pus is retained in it at all: and take consolidating medicines which are put upon a sign, suitable to what you wish. And extend them upon linen cloth. And let the cloth be of such quantity that communication of the whole sinus is made. Then cut with forceps a hole straight in the orifice of the sinus, a little wider than the orifice of the sinus. Then extend from soft ointments upon another cloth according to the quantity of the hole: and put it upon that one in a position distant from the orifice of the sinus so that the flow of pus from it may be relieved: and do not remove the large cloth except after several days at once.
But the one which is upon the orifice of the sinus is the one which you remove every hour so that what collects in it from pus may exit: and so that you may know whether what flows from it is much or little: or digested or undigested.
And with this again consider the place of the sinus itself whether the master thereof feels pain in it or there is no pain in it: and whether there is an abscess in it or not.
When therefore your medication proceeds thus, and you see the matter which flows out upon the orifice of the sinus: then you will know that the sinus is already adhering or approaching adhesion: then therefore dissolve it in the morning or on the third day: and when you dissolve the wound then change another cloth and renew the ointment.
But if after a long time a subtle virus comes out of the sinus, then do not despair of its adherence, for its healing is approaching, since there are some people who delay the generation of flesh in their wounds, and there are others who act contrary to that.
But if after many days purulent matter undigested comes out of the sinus, then you will know that the sinus does not adhere.
Therefore if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and its matter prolonged: then add to its drying medicines, so that they may be humid in their substance and dry in their power, such as diaphicinum ointment, when an excess of addition from zegi is added to it.
And of the last things by which it is cured, is to take diaphicinum ointment and dissolve it with rose oil, and pour over it old wine equal in its substance.
Then mix it with that and use it.
And honey, when you boil it until it thickens, and use it, now does a similar action to this, when diaphicinum ointment is not present to you. Or take myrrh and aloe and frankincense: grind the whole thing and sprinkle it over honey while it is over the fire. Then put a cloth over it and bind it over the sinus: and smear with the honey that you have boiled until it has thickened: and sprinkle spices over it, and put a cloth over it and bind it.
And sometimes long aristolochia is administered in it, and the roots of the lily and there is a lily: and herb flour, and centaury. Use them simply or combined, grind them, and sift them through a sieve: and sprinkle over the honey that I have described, and use it.
But if the matter of the sinus is prolonged and does not heal by this treatment, then know that there is corruption in its depths: or it is already making an impression on the bones, or on the remaining hard members, or ligaments: then cure it with the treatment for fistulas, according to what has been previously stated.
On the treatment of whitlow and a crushed nail, and cutting into an added finger, and sectioning.
Whitlow is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the thumb of the hand or foot; and perhaps it arises in the remaining fingers.
Therefore when the matter thereof prolongs, and its care is neglected, and it becomes inflamed with a hot abscess; or it corrupts, and emits pus, until it corrodes the root of the nail; and perhaps it corrupts it altogether, and perhaps the corruption reaches the bone, until it has a foul odor; and the extremity of the finger becomes wide, and its color becomes dark.
When therefore you treat it, as we said in the division, and your treatment does not succeed; then it is necessary that you cut with an iron the whole superfluity which remained from the nail. Then cauterize the wound after that. For the cautery is very helpful.
But if the bone is sound, and the nail is also sound, and the empty additions of the nail already compress the flesh inwards, and begin to prick it, and injure it: then it is necessary that you place a thin Radium under an angle of the nail which pricks the flesh, and push it upwards; and cut into the flesh with ease, and place upon what remains of the flesh from burning medicines, corrosive ones, until all of it is removed. Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
But if the corruption already presses into the bone, then it is necessary that you cut into the bone, and extract it; for it never heals while a corrupted bone remains in it.
And if you see the erosion and corruption advancing into the finger, then cut it at one node, according to what has been previously mentioned about it. Then treat it until it heals.
If, however, attrition or percussion should befall a nail, and there should be intense pain in it, then it is necessary first to let blood from a weak person. Then dry the nail with a sharp spatulum and make a transverse cut upwards.
And be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh which is under the nail, for you will cause intense pain through it to a weak person, and it will be the cause of added growth of flesh in that place.
Then treat the place with something that relieves pain.
An added finger that is born in some men's hands, perhaps it is all fleshy; and perhaps there are bones in some of them; and perhaps there is a nail on it; and some of them are born at the root of a joint, or its birth is in some knots of the finger. Therefore, the one that is born in some knots of the finger does not move; and the one that is born at a joint of the finger perhaps moves.
Therefore, the section of the fleshy one of these is easy. Which is to say, you should cut it off at its root with a broad spatulum.
But the treatment of the one whose birth is at the root of a joint is difficult. Therefore abstain from cutting it.
But in the one that is born in a finger at the last knot, then you must first cut its flesh with a round incision down to the bone. Then saw the bone with one of those saws suitable for that purpose. Then treat it until it heals.
Consolidation that happens between the fingers often happens either from the birth of a man, that is, he is born with it, or from consolidation of a wound, or from burning by fire and similar things.
Therefore, it is necessary to separate that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form. Then place cloths between them, or cloths soaked in rose oil, so that they do not join quickly and separate them; or put a thin sheet of lead between them until the place is consolidated as needed.
And similarly if a consolidation happens to some fingers with the palm, then cut that consolidation according to what is prepared and suits the shape of the limb.
Concerning the Incision of a Blemish.
Varicose veins are large, full veins affected by excess melancholic humors which occur in many parts of the body; and their occurrence is most common in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Therefore, it is necessary that you administer a strong flogging with a black whip several times.
Then phlebotomize the patient from those veins.
The cure of them with iron is according to two methods. One of them is that they are cut and black blood is extracted. And the other method is that the vein is raised and entirely removed.
The section of it is according to this method. First embrocate the leg with plenty of hot water until the thick feculent blood is resolved. Then bind the infirm's leg from the upper part of their hip to the lower part of the knee with a bandage. Then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a wide incision.
Then raise it, that is, draw the blood into your hand from the lower part of the leg up to the top, and the phlebotomist should first phlebotomize the infirm person at the top. Then cut the vein further down until a quantity of blood comes out which you see is sufficient and which the strength of the infirm person can tolerate.
Then bind it; and order him to abstain from foods that produce black bile; and repeat evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and this is harmful to the weak one.
Its elevation however is in this way. Shave the leg of the sick person, if there are many hairs on it. Then introduce it into a bath; or embrocate it on his leg with hot water, until it reddens and the veins swell; or exercise it with strenuous exercise, if a bath is not present for him, until the limb heats up.
Then dry the skin directly at the vein section lengthwise; or at its last part near the knee, or in its lower part near the heel.
Then open the skin with hooks, and expose the vein from all sides, until it appears to the senses; and at its appearance, you see it reddish towards a dark decline. When therefore it comes out of the skin, you see it white as if it were a chord.
Then insert a trocar beneath it until it is raised and comes out of the skin; suspend it with a blunt hook, gentle one.
Then make another incision near that incision with three fingers. Then expose the skin from the upper part of the vein, until it appears. Then raise it with trocars as you did, and suspend it with another hook, as you did at first.
Then make another incision, or several more incisions, if it seems necessary to you. Then raise it and cut it with the last incision near the heel.
Then extract it to the incision that is above it.
And do this until you extract it from the incision that is above, or higher incisions altogether, until it comes out completely; then cut it.
But if it does not obey you to be drawn out and raised: then introduce a needle with a strong double thread, and tie it, and draw it out; or introduce a radium under it, and turn your hand in every direction until it comes out. And beware that it does not fall in. For if it falls in, it becomes difficult for you to raise it greatly, and harm comes upon the weak one from it.
When therefore you have drawn it all out, then place wool soaked in wine and rose oil, or oil over the place of the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
But if the thorn is contracted, having a twist with an involution to the parts, and is not as we said according to straightness: then it is necessary that you split it above it on every part of its twist, and the places of its involution.
Then suspend it with hooks until you raise it all; and beware at your section above it that you do not fall upon a vein, or wound it; for it will become difficult for you to raise, or draw it out. Therefore preserve your prudence.
The Form of a Falling Thorn by Which It Is Healed.
The form of a blind thorn.
It does not have a curvature like the other thorns, nor is it of a sharp point, so that it does not wound a vein; and it is of a thick, gentle flexuousness; for if it were slender, it would fall upon a vein by its slenderness: but rather let it be excessively thick as we said.
On the Extraction of a Vein of the Leg.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot lands, such as Al-Andalus and the land of the Arabs, and in dry, hot lands of little tenderness; that is, those in which grass, nor trees are born.
And perhaps it arises in other places of the body besides the legs.
And its generation indeed is from putrefaction which occurs under the skin, just as snakes and ascaris worms occur within bodies, and worms generated between the skin and flesh.
And the sign of the beginning of this event of this Vein is, that a vehement inflammation occurs in the leg. Then the place blisters. Then the Vein begins to come out from the place of that blistering, as if it were the root of a plant, or an animal.
Therefore when its extremity appears from it, it is necessary that you wrap upon it a piece of lead, whose weight is from one drachma to two drachmas, and bind it firmly: and let the lead hang suspended from the leg.
Whenever therefore anything comes out from it to the outside, wrap that in lead and bind it. And if it is prolonged much, then cut a part of it, and wrap the remainder. And do not cut it entirely before it all comes out. For if you cut it, it contracts and enters into the flesh: and it causes an abscess to occur, and putrefaction in the place, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore it is necessary that it be handled gently and be drawn out gradually until it comes out from its last part, and nothing remains from it in the body: and from this indeed Vein there comes out in some men what is in its length five palms and ten. And it has already come to me that it came out of a man twenty palms long.
But if it happens to you in the hour of your medication: then insert a ray into its foramen, and pierce it with a long foramen, along with its body, until all that is in it from matter is evacuated: and administer putrefaction to the place with medicines for several days. Then take care of it with the treatment of abscesses.
And indeed this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the junction of the foot, or in the foot itself; and it has many openings, and a branch goes out from every opening.
Therefore care for it as we said in the division, and with that which was stated before.
Concerning the cutting out of worms generated under the skin, and it is called bovine disease.
This disease is called Bovine Disease in a certain land among us; because it very often happens to oxen, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh.
And it wanders throughout the whole body, ascending and descending; and it is shown to the senses by its movement from limb to limb, until it bursts wherever it bursts in the skin and comes out.
And its generation is from the putrefaction of certain humors. Just as worms and snakes happen, that is, earthworms and roundworms in the belly.
And it is feared because of its harmfulness. Because when it wanders through the body and rises to the head and reaches a place, then perhaps it opens there and comes out and destroys the eye; and that happens very often.
When therefore you wish to cure it and extract it, then it is not done except when it wanders and appears to the senses.
Therefore it is necessary that you tie what is above it and what is below it with a strong ligature constriction. Then cut above it and extract it.
But if it burrows into the flesh and you do not find it: then place a cautery with fire upon the spot until it dies.
And the greater thing that is feared is its corruption, by which it corrupts the eye as we said.
If however you see that it has already reached the head near the eye, then bind a good ligature under it above the eyebrow. Then cut above it and extract it.
And it is necessary that the sick person use cleansing of his body with medicines dissolving foul and bad humors.
And let him beware of foods generating putrefaction.
Concerning incision for the ailment Nakir.
This ailment is called in our land Nakir, and it is a pain which occurs in certain members, then it is transformed from member to member.
And I myself have indeed already seen it, according to what I relate to you. I was summoned to an infirm woman in certain ulcers. She exposed her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm cord.
And after I remained for an hour, I saw one swelling advance with a burning sensation, just as a worm advances, ascending to her shoulder faster than it is possible: so that it is like living silver, when it runs from place to place.
Therefore the pain withdrew from that place and was fixed in the shoulder.
Then I sat for an hour and it ran through the rest of the body until it reached the other arm.
Then she narrated to me that it revolved throughout her whole body, according to what I saw.
Therefore I marveled at the swiftness of its transformation from member to member. And indeed before that, I had not seen this ailment with my own eyes in such a manner. However, I saw many who found pain to be transformed from member to member, and I did not see it with my own eyes as I saw it in the woman.
And I do not think that it is anything but because the woman was from those who are of dry bodies with exposed veins, therefore that swiftness appears to the senses.
And it is necessary that they not appear according to this method in those who are delicate and have moist bodies, hidden veins.
Therefore when you wish its cure and the patient feels that pain: then if it appears to you by eye as we said, then bind above it and below it quickly: and cut above it until that wind shall go out constricted: and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it with your own eyes: then treat it with shaking of the body and with that which expels winds and drives them out with foul pills and pills of Serapina and similar ones.
Concerning the Extraction of Arrows.
Arrows are diversified according to their kinds and according to the places in which they fall from the body.
Their diversity is this: since some of them have large points and small ones: and concave ones and deaf ones. And some of them have three angles. And some of them have tongues. And some of them have stars.
Those which are according to the limbs in which they fall are according to two ways. For either the limbs are from the principal concave limbs such as the brain and heart and liver and lung and kidneys and intestines and bladder and those similar to them. Therefore when it falls into any of these limbs and the signs of death appear to you which I will tell you after then it is necessary that you avoid the extraction of that arrow from them for death follows him in whom it is in many dispositions. And when these evil signs do not appear to you and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the limb then draw it out and care for the wound.
For the signs of the brain when an arrow falls into it and penetrates the mouth and exits through the nasal passage which is above the brain are: because vehement spasms and dimness of vision and vertigo and redness in the eyes and swelling and redness of the tongue and spasm and confusion of mind and vomiting with cholera. And perhaps blood will issue from the nostrils, or ears. And perhaps speech is cut off, and the voice is destroyed. And there issues from the place of the wound a white moisture like pus. And there comes forth from it something like the wateriness of flesh.
If therefore these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment, and extract the arrow if it does not come forth.
The signs of an arrow when it falls into the heart are that it is near the left nipple; and he feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not in a hollow thing. And perhaps the arrow has a motion similar to the motion of the pulse; and black blood flows from the wound. And following that is coldness of the extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting. Know therefore that death descends without doubt.
And the sign of an arrow when it has wounded the lung is the exit of frothy blood from the wound; and the vessels which follow the neck become inflamed, and the color of the sick person changes. And he breathes out a great, deep sigh; and he seeks the attraction of cold air.
But if the arrow falls into the membrane which is in the chest, then it is near the small ribs; and there is a great panting with violent pain, with a sigh; and all the limbs of the shoulders are moved.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps something undigested from food will issue from the wound.
And if the arrow falls into the belly and is fixed there, something like dung will issue from the wound, or phlegm, or intestine which has already been broken. Therefore there is no hope in its treatment, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
But if the arrow falls into the bladder, and urine comes forth; and something proceeds from it to the outside, and the pain is stronger upon the sick person: then know that it is mortal.
The remaining limbs, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder blade, armpit, vertebrae of the back, collarbone, hip, thigh, and similar limbs are saved according to multiple arrangements: when the arrow does not find an artery or nerve; and the arrow is not poisonous.
And I tell you what I have seen about these arrows so that you may understand through it concerning your treatment.
Which is this, because an arrow fell to a certain man in the tear duct of his eye, at the root of the nose. Therefore I extracted it from him on the other side, under the fat of his ear; and he was healed, and no harm befell his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had fallen to him in the fat of his eye under the lower eyelid; and the arrow was already concealed, and I did not obtain from it except a small part of it with which it adheres to its wood; and it was a large arrow from the arrows of Turkish bows, with soft iron, in which there are no ears.
Therefore the Jew was healed, and no bad accident befell his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And it was an Arabic arrow, and it is the one which has ears. I therefore made a cut above it between two folds; and it was already submerged in his throat. Therefore I proceeded delicately with it until I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man which had fallen into his belly; and we thought that he would die from it.
After thirty days had passed him, and nothing changed in his condition, I made a cut above the arrow; and I devised something about it, and extracted it; and he was healed, and no bad accident befell him.
And I saw a man to whom an arrow had fallen on his back, and the wound had healed over it. Seven years afterward, the arrow emerged from the root of his hip.
And I saw a woman to whom an arrow had fallen on her abdomen, and the wound healed over it, and the arrow remained inside her: and nothing changed in her disposition, and the woman did not find harm from it in any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow had fallen on his face: and the wound healed, and it remained, not finding much pain from it: and similar things to these many.
And I extracted an arrow from a man of the King's princes, which had fallen to him in the middle of his nose, and was now inclined toward his right side a little: and the arrow was entirely concealed.
I was therefore summoned for his treatment after the fall of the arrow up to three days. I found the wound of the arrow very tight.
I therefore inquired for it with a subtle probe, and did not feel it; and he himself indeed found a puncture and pain under his right ear. I therefore hoped that this puncture was from the extremity of the arrow.
I therefore plastered the place with a plaster in which there was attractive and digestive power, trusting within myself that the place would become inflamed and the sign of the arrow would appear to me, so that I might cut above it: and nothing happened in the place indicating that the arrow had reached the location.
I therefore persisted with the plaster upon him for many days: and nothing happened, and the wound meanwhile healed: and he remained weak about its extraction for a space of days, until he felt the arrow one day within his nose. And he related this to me.
And he related this to me. I therefore placed sharp, corrosive medicine upon the wound for many days, until it opened; and when I probed it, I felt the slender extremity of the arrow adhering to the wood.
Then I added to the opening of the wound through that sharp medicine until the extremity of the arrow appeared visibly to us; and it took me about four months with this.
Then after the wound was enlarged and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it and move it, and it did not yield to coming out: then I did not cease to refine and contrive upon it with various ingenious methods until on a certain day I began upon it with forceps skillfully made, according to how their form will come at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it. Then I restored the wound.
And physicians indeed judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored. Therefore I restored it and the wound became consolidated and he was healed with perfect health: and nothing harmed him at all.
And I relate to you the quality of extracting certain arrows so that you may establish a rule and meaning upon that which I have not said.
Because the parts of this art and their distinctions are not comprehended with narration; nor does this book comprehend it, and a prudent craftsman compares a little with much; and with that which is present, with that which is absent; and he finds a new operation and a new instrument among the descents of these foreign matters of this art when they happen.
I say therefore that arrows do not come out from the limbs in which they are fixed except according to two ways. Either by attraction from the place from which it entered. Or contrary to the other part.
And that which comes out from where it entered is either an arrow proceeding into a fleshy place and it is attracted and comes out.
And if it does not yield to coming out at the hour in which it falls: then it is necessary that you let it alone for several days until the flesh which is around it putrefies and its attraction is relieved and its exit.
And likewise if it is fixed in bone, and does not yield to you for removal, then leave it also for several days: and repeat it with attraction and motion every day, until it comes out.
But if it does not yield to you for removal after several days, then it is necessary that you perforate in the circumference of the arrow in the bone itself from every part with a fine awl, until the arrow is enlarged. Then draw it out and extract it.
But if the arrow is already concealed in a place in the body and hidden from sensation: then inquire for it with your hand. If you feel it, then draw it out with certain instruments which are suitable for drawing it.
But if you cannot get hold of it because of the constriction of the wound and because of the length of the arrow deep inside: and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein there: then probe over it until the wound is enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
But if there are ears by which it is held, then free the flesh fixed in them from every part with all your skill: and apply yourself, if it is not possible to get hold of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and their twisting until it comes out.
And when you perform the extraction of an arrow, wherever it is, then use twisting of your hand with forceps on all sides, until you make it come out; and with subtle finesse, so that the arrow is not broken, and its attraction and extraction become difficult for you.
And if you are not able to get it out within one hour, then leave it for several days, until that which is around it becomes putrid. Then repeat it; for then the tension will be eased. But if the flow of blood opposes you, then administer what we said about care in its chapter; and guard your strength from cutting a vein, or nerve, or cord.
And administer ingenuity in every way possible to you for the evasion of the arrow; and let it be with ease, and tranquility, or slowness, and firmness, as I have told you.
And it is necessary that you make, when you draw out the arrow, it be weak according to the shape according to which it was at the time of the arrow's case itself. For it is more beneficial. But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you from shapes.
But an arrow which comes out from the opposite side of the other, or already proceeds something from it to the outside; or makes a hump at the end of the arrow by feeling from the upper part of the nearby skin and you see it prominent: then cut above it, and let the incision be according to the amount that your forceps can grasp in it.
Then draw it out; for it itself becomes easy for exit.
But if it is held fast in bone, then twist your hand according to the roundness, until the arrow presses into the bone and enlarges itself; then draw it out.
And if not: leave it for several days; then repeat it until it comes out.
If the wood of the arrow is in it, then drive it out with that.
But if the wood has fallen out and you wish to apply pressure: then insert a concave instrument into it so that it enters the cavity of its tail; then drive it out with it.
But if the arrow is concave, then drive it out with an instrument entering into it. For the arrow is relieved by that.
But if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary that you scoop out all the flesh in which the poison is, if it is possible for you to do so. Then treat it with what is suitable for that.
But if an arrow falls into the chest, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side: and it is near from what you touch with your hand, and it is possible for you to cut above it: then cut, and be cautious of cutting a vein, or a nerve, and extract it.
Then sew the wound, if you see it necessary, and treat it until it heals.
And this is the form of forceps with which arrows are extracted.
Let the extremities be like a bird's beak, which are made like iron: when they grasp onto an arrow, they do not release it.
And many kinds are made from them, large and small and medium, according to the size, slenderness, and width of the wound and its tightness.
The form of a concave pusher.
And the form of a deaf pusher.
This is so that the extremity of the deaf one is like a spoke, so that its entry into the concave arrow is eased and it can be driven out with it.
Concerning Phlebotomy of Veins.
Veins suitable for phlebotomy, of which the custom is to flow in the body, are thirty.
Of these, there are sixteen in the head: two pulsating veins, which are behind the ears, called two Herbae; and two arteries, which are apparent in the two temples; and two veins which are in the tear ducts of the two eyes, which are called Aspicientes; and a prepared vein in the middle of the forehead; and a vein which is at the end of the nose. And two Guidegi, which are in the neck. And two veins which are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins which are in the lower lip. And these are the veins which are called Algecherich. And two veins which are under the tongue.
Veins which are phlebotomized in the arms are five veins in each arm.
One of them is the Cephalic, and it is on the sylvan side; and the common people call it the vein of the head. And the Fusca. And it is the Middle vein, and it is composed of a branch of the Basilar and a branch of the Cephalic; and the common people call it the vein of the body. And the Basilar, and it is located on the domestic side; and it is also called the Titillcaris. And the common people call it the vein of the belly. And the Brachial cord, and it is located on top of the fossa; and it is that in which one phlebotomizes, and it is that which appears above the thumb with a clear appearance.
And the Saluatella; and it is a vein that is between the annular and the little finger; and it has two branches.
And in the leg and foot there are three veins. One of them is which is under the curvature of the thumb from the outer side. And the second is the Saphena and its place is at the heel from the inner side. And the vein Nesse: and its place is at the heel from the outer side.
And in the other leg there are three veins similar to those.
Concerning phlebotomy of two veins after the ears.
But phlebotomy of the two veins which are behind the ears is beneficial for old catarrhs and hemicrania and apoplexy and bad ulcers of the head.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is according to what I relate. And it is, that the head of the sick person be shaved and his occiput be rubbed in the place of the two veins with a rough cloth with good rubbing. Then let the sick person constrict his neck with a band until two veins appear. And their places are behind the ears in two hollow places of the head. Therefore seek them with your finger and where you feel their pulse under your finger mark there with a hot iron.
Then take a phlebotomy knife which is called the Incidens. Then insert it under the vein into the skin until the phlebotomy knife reaches the bone. Then lift your hand with the vein and skin upwards and cut into the vein and skin with an incidental incision. And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two joined fingers or about that and make as much blood come out as you wish.
Then constrict it with lint and let it go until it heals.
And now at the beginning of the book incision of them and their branding preceded.
The benefit of phlebotomy of two arteries which are in both temples is for an old headache; and for habitual dropsy; and for persistent ophthalmia; and for the course of acute, overflowing fluxes to the eyes.
And the quality of phlebotomy in these cases is as I tell you. Let the weak patient severely constrict his neck until two veins appear clearly to the senses; and let their pulse be shown beneath your finger. Then mark them with a cautery.
Then lift the skin above the vein upward with your index finger and insert the phlebotomist's instrument cutting beneath it, and elevate the vein upward. And cut into it as you have done with the other two veins; and let the blood flow out according to the amount of your necessity.
Then release the constriction of the weak patient and place your finger upon the vein for one hour. Afterwards place a compress and cotton wadding upon it and constrict it tightly from above; and release it until it heals.
And the preceding recollection of them, and their incision, and their extraction have already been mentioned at the beginning of the book.
The benefit of phlebotomy of the vein of the forehead after phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is for old facial ailments; and for headache; and redness; and foul ulcers.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is as I tell you. Let the weak patient constrict his neck with a towel until a vein appears. Then take the instrument which is called a Foissor.
Place the projecting point which is on the head of the Fossa over the very vein, and strike it with a comb, or with some other thing in like manner: and let the blood run according to the quantity which you wish. Then loosen the perforation of the sick person, and bind it until it heals.
And sometimes it is opened with a wide phlebotomy. But it is not necessary that it be of an acute extremity, as are the other phlebotomies, but rather of a wide extremity. And let the phlebotomy be made across it, because the mouth is nearby; and perchance it will be broken in it when it is slender.
The benefit of the two veins which are in both lacrimals of both eyes is for the eye from scab and redness; and swelling in the eye, and illnesses of the face.
And the quality of their phlebotomy is that the sick person should bind his own neck with a bandage. Then phlebotomize them; and you should be standing over his head.
And let the phlebotomy be made across it a little in length, with a small phlebotom, a little wide, for there is not much flesh in the place. For if the phlebotom is of a slender extremity, it may perchance be broken.
Then let as much blood run out as you need. And put a pledget over them, and bind them one night, and loosen them.
The phlebotomy of the veins of the nose is helpful for acute fever, and vehement soda, and illnesses of the face, such as hemicrania, and redness which occurs in the face; especially when it is old.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is such that the weak neck constricts. Then hold its nose with your left hand and take a slender, long phlebotome; and fix it in the middle of the hare itself, between that which divides the nose according to straightness. Because the vein does not appear to the sense there and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary that you keep your hand with the phlebotome for a little while and make the blood run according to your need. Then bind it with one ligature at night. For it restores quickly.
Indeed the benefit of two phlebotomies of a Guideg is for the constriction of asthma and the inception of leprosy and melancholic illnesses and impetigo and bad ulcers and corroding ones, that is, summer herpes.
And the quality of their phlebotomy is such that it constricts the weak one under both in his neck with a ligature; and the artisan stands above the head of the weak one and the weak one sits on a seat.
Then, with the phlebotomy, widen the vein to a length for a little while. Then extract from the blood a moderate quantity, or according to that which you see according to the necessity which is for it. Then do similarly with the other vein.
Afterwards loosen the ligature and constrict the two veins in the middle so that the weak one is not startled. And leave it until morning. For the wound heals.
Concerning the phlebotomy of the veins of an Algeberich. The benefit of the phlebotomy of the veins of an Algeberich is because it contributes to alcohol in the mouth and corruption of the gum; and bad ulcers; and fissures of the lips, and bad ulcers even those which are in the nose and around it.
And the nature of their phlebotomy is such that you should make the weak person sit before you and bind their neck with a band. Then turn back their lip and look at the two veins: one is from the right side of the lip and the second from the left: and the demonstration of both is by the blackness of both. And this is true because around them are small, black veins. Therefore, cut both with an incident incision.
But if there is doubt upon you and you do not know which of them it is, then attend to the incision of the larger ones and the more manifest.
And similarly do with the two veins that are in the upper lip; and indeed, custom most often runs with this; and cut the two veins which are in the lower lip.
Concerning phlebotomy of the Vein under the Tongue after Phlebotomy of the Cephalic Vein. Indeed, the benefit of phlebotomy of the two veins under the tongue is that phlebotomy of the Cephalic vein is for premonitions which are in the throat and pain of the uvula and pains of the mouth.
And the quality of their phlebotomy is such that the weak person should sit between your hands before the sun and lift up their tongue, and look under the tongue from one side for a vein and from their other side a vein; and the color of both inclining towards blackness.
Therefore phlebotomize both: and take care not to insert your hand in phlebotomizing them. For under them are arteries and perhaps it may happen that a flow of blood comes from those arteries.
The three veins which are phlebotomized in the elbow are those in whom phlebotomy runs with custom in all people.
And phlebotomy of them is done according to two modes. Either by puncturing with a wide myrtle phlebotome or an olive-shaped one inclined to subtlety; or by cutting with a knife phlebotome, and it is called Alnesil. And this is its form.
And of these there are wide and subtle kinds according to the width of the veins and their firmness. The myrtle phlebotome's form is wide as you see. And it is suitable for opening concave veins, full, proceeding, apparent, large, and those which contain thick, cloudy blood.
And this phlebotome is of lesser width and more subtle extremity.
And it suits the phlebotomy of subtle veins which contain thin, yellow blood.
But the Basiliac, which is one of these three veins, is a help for phlebotomy. Because it draws blood from illnesses which are under the throat and neck, from that which follows the chest and the belly; and it suits the phlebotomist with a phlebotome to approach it carefully and be fearful of it because under it is an artery. If therefore he errs and adds to the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will strike that artery, and there will be a flow of blood. Therefore it is necessary not to phlebotomize it with a puncturing phlebotome but rather to cut it with Alnesil.
But if the Basiliac does not appear by a manifest appearance, then it is necessary that someone else find it and change to another vein or seek some branch of it; or a phlebotome in place of it on the Brachium. For it itself is manifest, and cut it with the phlebotome Alnesil, as we said.
But if you wish to phlebotomize the same, then it is necessary before the constriction of the arm, to touch the place until you know the place of the pulse. Then mark the spot with a cautery, afterwards the arm, and cut the vein with a concave incision using an Alnesil lancet as we have said. And take care that the percussion does not fall through the space from the place of the artery.
And when you see, as you tighten the ligature, swelling in the place which you marked with a cautery, then that swelling is swelling of the artery; therefore avoid it.
And if you see the blood rise at the phlebotomy like the urine of a child and it is subtle, reddish blood; then you know that it is from arterial blood. Then hasten, and place your finger upon the space longways, then remove your finger. If therefore the blood is cut off (for it is often cut off) then tighten the arm and release it; and let the weak one beware of its movement; and let there be fear upon him.
And let him not move it for several days until it heals.
But if the blood is not cut off and overcomes you and you do not have medicine present to you at that moment, then cut into the artery if it appears to you. For its extremities are contracted and the blood is cut off.
Or take the bark of a pistachio nut and shred it; take one half and tighten it upon the place of the vein with a decent constriction, with a ligature and poultices up to another day.
Then if the blood is cut off, it is good. And if not: then treat it with that of which a previous remembrance proceeded from the place of powders cutting off the flow of blood; and the incision of its blood is not difficult in many constitutions because of the small place of the wound and the possibility of a ligature from the arm.
The veins of the temples are beneficial for phlebotomy, because they draw blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; therefore, because it is composed of a branch of the Basilary vein and a branch of the Cephalic vein, as we have said.
And it is fitting for the phlebotomist to make an incision on it above fear of cutting during phlebotomy, for beneath it is a nerve. Therefore if he adds to the puncture during phlebotomy and finds a nerve, there occurs in it numbness and healing becomes difficult and perhaps it does not heal completely.
And this nerve often appears to the senses. But if it is hidden in some people and is subtle and does not appear, then it is necessary that you place your phlebotomy so that the phlebotomist makes a section with Alnesil and avoids nerves with your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves then find the vein in length.
Concerning the Cephalic Vein. The Cephalic vein is beneficial for phlebotomy because it draws blood from the head and carries it to illnesses of the eyes.
And it is necessary in this vein especially if you wish, for the phlebotomist to pierce it with an olive phlebotome or a myrtle phlebotome; because it is the safest of all veins because there is neither an artery nor a nerve beneath it.
However it is fitting for you during phlebotomy to avoid the head of the lizard with the phlebotome and seek a gentler place; and it does not harm it if it is not found in the first percussion to go over it several times with the phlebotome.
However perhaps it may become inflamed in some people when it is not pierced in the first percussion but that inflammation does not harm it at all.
Concerning the Utility of Phlebotomy and Precautions to be Observed Therein. The quality and incidents of phlebotomy are derived from it; you must consider its correction.
Therefore, first of all, you must know that phlebotomy is not administered except for the preservation of health and its perseverance, and precaution against the advent of diseases.
And so that phlebotomy may be performed in one of the three veins which are in the elbow, namely, the Cephalic, and the Fusca, and the Basilica. And so that phlebotomy may be performed at the beginning of Spring on a fast, in summer and autumn; and winter after a meal, when the signs of repletion appear.
And let phlebotomy be performed on the first or third day after three hours have passed.
But phlebotomy which is administered in diseases does not have a determined hour; but when necessity and convenience call for it, by night or day, at any hour and time.
And children should not be subjected to phlebotomy until they reach fourteen years of age. Nor should a pregnant woman be subjected to phlebotomy except from the fourth to the seventh month. Nor should old men who have already passed sixty years be subjected to phlebotomy.
Therefore, when someone desires to undergo phlebotomy for whatever reason it may be, they must purify their bowels before phlebotomy with a mild enema if there is much retained feces in them so that the veins do not draw off foul and harmful superfluities from the intestines during phlebotomy.
Nor should a patient be subjected to phlebotomy when they are full, that is, experiencing nausea; nor intoxicated, nor recovering from drunkenness until that has been removed from them. Nor one weak with dropsy.
And beware of phlebotomy again after a colic attack, vomiting, diarrhea, increased intercourse, labor, exertion, wakefulness, fasting, and anything that dissolves virtue from the bodily or animal substance.
Then consider the subtleties of the humors before that, if the blood is thick with foods and drinks, and medicines: if it is possible to thin it.
Then he should enter a bath, if nothing forbids it: or he should exercise with some exertion, so that the blood becomes thinner.
And place his phlebotomy on his chest, around the third hour of the day, as we said: and try, so that his chest is evacuated that day from all animal evils: such as anxiety, and anger, and fear: and from all bodily evils, such as labor, and pain, and excessive intercourse, and those similar.
And let the things with which he is accustomed to use be present in his seat: from sweetness and smell and joy and those similar as much as possible.
Then let the phlebotomist sit on a cushion which is higher than the cushion of the one being bled: then let him draw out his arm and rub it with his hand twice or three times. Then let him tie a ligature with strips of linen and wrap it twice.
And let the constriction be moderate, because when the constriction is unequal or by excess in the constriction, then it prevents the flow of blood: or in relaxation, then it also prevents the flow of blood.
Then after the constriction it is necessary that the one being bled rub his hands together until the veins swell and make themselves known to the sense.
Then let the phlebotomist clean the one being bled with a little oil, preferably old.
Then let him place the index finger of his left hand on the very vein under the place where he wishes to perform the phlebotomy, a little: so that the vein does not flee and percussion occurs. Because from the veins there are some like a fleeing chord at phlebotomy: and among them are those which are full of windiness: and when you place the lancet on it, it contracts under the lancet and deceives the phlebotomist, and does not open the vein: and if it opens it, it is constricted: therefore for this reason it is necessary that the phlebotomist be steady and attentive to all these things.
Then let him lay down the phlebotomist. Therefore if a vein is opened from one side, then it is good. And if not, then repeat that on another side a little below or above it with speed: if the place does not become inflamed.
But if it becomes inflamed or weak and swells, then let him go for a day or two days: and let him not tighten the ligature. For perhaps it will draw in a hot inflammation. And let him not enter a bath.
Then let him repeat the bloodletting if he wishes.
But if the opening is small or the blood flows subtly: and you fear that the quantity of blood will not come out as you wish: then repeat the phlebotomy in the same hole according to straightness, and add a little in the operation.
And do that with speed before the place becomes inflamed, for an inflamed place is in many men at a small operation.
Therefore if you see it already inflamed, then do not repeat it on top of it at all, for it will excuse nothing to you. And put something from the dregs of oil on top of it: because it relieves the course of blood. And it is better in this place than the oil itself and than other oils.
And similarly administer the dregs of oil in all your bloodletting, by which phlebotomists prohibit the course of blood at veins: and they do this with tyriaca, aloes, and sagapenum when one of them is put on the place.
For blood becomes thinner and dissolves when it is thick.
But if a large inflammation should happen in the place of bloodletting, for it often happens, especially to him who is not a phlebotomist except from that side, or the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and put a sponge infused in water and salt, warmed a little, on the place: and bind it for an hour; because it will be resolved.
And it is necessary that you do this after the blood has exited from the vein itself, with its complement, or from another vein.
If anything of blackness or greenness remains in the place after a few days, it does not harm; and if you wish, put something dissolved of aloe or myrrh upon it; or something from the juice of mint, that is, calamint or something similar to it.
And very often there occur abscesses and swellings at the phlebotomy of the basilica.
Place your hand upon it, then if you find softness under your compression upon it, then that prominence is bad. Therefore be careful to place something from what we have said upon it. For perhaps arterial blood may flow from it.
But make a plaster for it with that in which there is astringency so that the place hardens. Then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
And it is necessary that you draw from every man blood according to the amount of his strength. And what appears from the prevailing color over the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it flow out until it reddens; and similarly if you see it thick, then let it flow out until it becomes refined; and similarly if it is sharp, until its sharpness is removed.
And it is necessary for him who is full, strong and needs bloodletting with one ounce, that the phlebotomy of the vein be enlarged, and the phlebotomy be wide; and in him who is weak, let it be the opposite of that.
And it is necessary that you draw it out in stages, and that the opening be narrow; and what is best administered in the phlebotomy of a vein is that there be a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is safe from the flow of blood and from the incision of a nerve; and it is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy by width and length.
And for whom fainting is customary during bloodletting, it is necessary that he eats before the bloodletting a small amount of bread soaked in pomegranate juice; or seneca root, if it is warmed; and you should extract from him three or four times an amount of blood.
And if he has a cold complexion, then let him take before bloodletting bread soaked in syrup of pomegranate juice, or in syrup of honey spiced with aromatic herbs, or in fragrantly spiced syrup.
And if fainting should occur during bloodletting, and the cause of it is the excessive loss of blood; then it is necessary that he takes in a drink meat broth and refined fragrant syrup; and uses aromatics with agarwood, and lines his chest with them; and uses the other things we mentioned in the division on fainting from evacuation.
But whoever wishes to spare his arm, and to shed his blood on a second day; it is necessary for him whose bloodletting is for much evacuation, and whose strength is weak, that he sheds blood gradually by the amount of his strength on consecutive days.
But he who wishes to spare his arm and shed his blood on a second day, and whose body is strong; then let him do it after seven or nine hours from his first bloodletting.
But whoever wishes to draw blood from his body to the opposite side from which it inclines; it is necessary that it be done to him on the second or third day.
In whom, however, the blood is already much and hot, and sharpens, and causes fever to occur; it is necessary that a large amount of blood goes out from him at once, and that a great quantity be extracted from him; and the opening should be widened until fainting occurs: after you have observed all the conditions of bloodletting: and so that you place your hand upon his pulse near the course of the blood, lest death occur in place of fainting. Very often it happens that this occurs when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligence occurs.
And it is not right when you wish to loosen the arm and loosen blood secondarily, when the opening of the vein has already been closed and the exit of blood becomes difficult, to press down on it forcefully, and to bend quickly. For that is very bad, rather let it alone until it is bled a second time.
Or remove with the sharpness of the phlebotomy that which has become clotted from blood in the opening of the vein and place something dissolved salt on it. And put some tyriacal aloes or sage on it and put it under gentle compression until the blood comes out.
But if the vein has already become inflamed, then let it be and do not press on it until the inflammation subsides.
But if necessity compels to loosen the blood a second time and there is no excuse then either let the phlebotomist perform it above that place or in the other arm in another vein.
The funis of the arm is phlebotomized in the place of Fuscae and Basilicae when they are not found and are hidden because it is composed from them.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is such that the weak person introduces their hand into warm water until the pulse reddens and the vein appears manifestly.
Then it is bound on it with a ligament with little constriction in the middle. Then the phlebotomy is made across it gradually, not laterally nor according to length; and let the opening be wide, and let your phlebotomy be such that you make it on the juncture of the hand a little.
But if the exit of blood is prohibited then immerse your hand in warm water and let the blood flow into the water until you achieve what you need.
But if you are in the summer days, then you excuse yourself from repeating the hand in warm water. And indeed most of all the course of blood is put in warm water in the time of winter.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all veins, because there is not a pulsating vein under it, nor a nerve.
But phlebotomy of the Saluatella vein of the right hand brings illnesses of the liver.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is, that you bind the back of the hand with a ligature, or your hand, after you have immersed it in warm water, until the vein is inflated and made very apparent to the sense. Then phlebotomize it transversely. And if you entirely miss it, it will not harm her in any way.
And preserve, that you do not finish your hand with phlebotomy. For under it are the nerves of the fingers laid bare from flesh.
Then repeat the hand to warm water, and let the blood run into it. For if you do not repeat it in warm water, the blood coagulates in the orifice of the vein, and is prohibited from the course.
Therefore when you draw out a necessary quantity of blood, then place oil and salt upon the vein: so that it does not quickly consolidate.
And similarly it is necessary, that you do with every strict branch.
But the advantage of its phlebotomy from the left hand is: because it brings illnesses of the spleen: and similarly do in its phlebotomy, just as you did in the second equally.
But the advantage of the Saphenae phlebotomy is for illnesses which are in the lower part of the body, such as illnesses of the wombs, and retention of menses, and infirmities of the kidneys, and ancient ulcers of the hips and legs, and similar from illnesses.
And the quality of his bloodletting is that the sick man should introduce his foot into warm water and make friction upon it until the veins protrude; and he should tie above the junction of the foot with a ligature. And indeed the place of the veins is near the heel, apparent towards the thumb; and many branches ramify from it on the surface of the foot.
Therefore let the phlebotomist make the incision in a larger branch of it, or at the heel in its aggregation; for this is better and safer.
But if the phlebotomist makes the incision on the surface of the foot, then let him beware of the nerves which are beneath it upon the surface of the foot.
And let your phlebotomy be such that the phlebotomist makes it transversely, as if he wished to cut it; and let the phlebotomy be Nesil.
But if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse his foot again in warm water and let the blood run into it until it is evacuated.
But if the phlebotomist misses the vein at the first attempt, then he should repeat the phlebotomy a little higher up, for this place is safe and you need not fear any harm from it, when you are careful of the nerves, as we have said.
And similarly with the Saphena vein of the other foot equally.
But the place of the Sciatic vein, as we have said, is near the heel on the outer side.
And the benefit of its bloodletting is for pain in the loins when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of its bloodletting is that the sick man should enter a bath and hurry; and he should constrict his leg from the side of the loins up above the heel with four fingers with a thin, long strip; for it does not appear except because of this.
When it therefore appears, then let the phlebotomist make the incision in whatever way is possible for him, or according to a transverse direction; and it is better that either he should cut into it with an incision or divide it with a section. For its location is safer, and it itself is very hidden in many people.
For its location is safer, and it itself is very hidden in many people. But if you do not find it, and it does not appear to the senses at all: then let phlebotomy take some branch of it, and that is the one which appears on the back of the foot, and towards the auricular: and be cautious of the nerves, and make it run out with as much blood as you wish.
Then loosen the stricture, and put skin over the place of phlebotomy, and bind the place. For it heals very quickly.
Concerning cupping, and the quality of its use.
Cups are made from horns, and from metal, and from glass.
And cupping indeed is done according to two methods. With scarification, and extraction of blood: and the other is cupping without scarification.
And this cupping which is without scarification is according to two methods. For it is either with fire. Or it is without fire.
And there are fourteen places on the body where cups which are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are applied. Of which one is cupping Alnocrati, and it is the back of the head: and Alkehel, and it is the middle of the neck: and cupping Alhagdahim, and they are two laminae of the neck from both sides at the same time: and cupping menti, and it is under the jawbone in the lower part of the mouth: and cupping of two spatulas: and cupping Alachosos on the top end of the coccyx: and cupping of two focilium, and they are the middle of the two forearms: and cupping of two legs: and cupping of two caulae.
And cupping indeed does not extract blood from you from the tiny veins scattered in the flesh, and therefore virtue does not fall away from them, as is the case with it from phlebotomy. Nor should ventilation be administered with or without fire in any illnesses which arise from repletion until the whole body is evacuated.
But if necessity compels to ventilation from illness or on account of custom we administer it at any hour in the beginning of the month, at the end of it and in the middle of it, and at whatever time it may be.
This is because there are men who when blood multiplies in them until they need its extraction through ventilation find heaviness and a headache in their head.
And among these men are those who find repletion and redness in their face, head and neck. And among these men are those who find itching in their face and forehead and darkness and dullness in their eyes.
And among these men are those who scratch the place of their ventilation. And among these men are those whose laughter multiplies. And among these men are those who find the taste of blood in their mouth or whose tongue swells and sheds blood. And among these men are those whose sleep multiplies. And among these men are those who see in their dream blood and redness and the slain and wounds and things that are similar to these.
Therefore when we see anything of these things, and especially if it is in the middle third of the month, we then order ventilation to be done after two or three hours have passed from the day.
The benefit of ventilation of the nape of the neck is because it brings relief to heaviness in the head and what flows down to the eyes. But it is necessary that it be done after evacuation of the whole body.
And this indeed, ventilation is in place of cephalic phlebotomy.
And it is not permitted for one of cold complexion or who has catarrh to use it. For it brings great harm to him.
And therefore old men should not use them, and those whose heads have cold ailments.
But whoever becomes accustomed to it, forgetfulness is generated upon him.
And therefore you must instruct the one who uses the cupping glass to put down his hand with the cupping glass for a short time towards the lower parts, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Cupping or Alkehel is in the place of phlebotomy for dark-complexioned people and phlebotomy for pale people, and therefore it brings relief from asthma, constriction of breath, fissure of the instrument of breathing, cough, and repletion.
And the cupping glass Alkehel should be applied for a short time, because if it is placed lower, it generates weakness in the heart and stomach.
But cupping with Alhagdahim brings relief from pains happening in the head, ophthalmia, hemicrania, perforation, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of phlebotomy for pale people.
And you must instruct the cupper not to press his hand with the scarring; so that he does not strike an artery and there is a flow of blood.
Cupping under the chin brings relief from ulcers in the mouth and corruption of the gums and similar ailments which are in the mouth; and it stands in the place of phlebotomy for alierich which are in the two lips.
Cupping with spoons brings relief from Alchafacham, which comes from repletion and heat.
Cupping of the interior parts of two focilium brings relief to phlebotomy of the three veins, pale and dark-complexioned and cephalic; because it draws blood from all those small veins which are in the flesh; and those small veins draw from other veins larger than them until the attraction reaches the three veins.
And you must instruct the one who performs cupping not to proceed too much in scarifying; because the place is stripped of flesh and beneath it are nerves and arteries.
But the cup which is cupped on the bare skin brings hemorrhoids to the anus and lower ulcers.
And you must instruct the one who performs cupping that the cup be large and that it be of metal; because the place needs strong suction and perhaps slender cups will break; and let it be scarified with a large scarification.
Cups on the legs diminish manifestly; because they draw blood from the whole body and bring ancient pains to the kidneys, womb, and bladder: they provoke menses, and bring about relief from dropsy and asthma: and they stand in place of two phlebotomies of the saphenous veins and alhorcobeni.
However, they weaken the body greatly and cause fainting to occur in many people.
And cupping of the alhorcobeni is benefit near to the benefit of cupping two legs.
The quality of the position of the cups is, that you place the cup first empty and suck with temperate suction; and do not prolong the position of the cups but put them quickly and remove them quickly so that the humors may come to the place with equal arrival: and do not cease to iterate and continue that until you see the place already reddening and swelling and the redness of blood appears; then scarify, and repeat the suction gradually. Then consider in the arrangement of bodies.
For he who is of men with tender flesh and rare pores, it is necessary that you scarify him once, no more; so that the place is not ulcerated.
And instruct the one who performs cupping to enlarge the scarification and make it shallow; and to moderate the suction in ease, swiftness, and gentle motion.
If there is a thickening in the blood, then it must be bled twice. Indeed, the first opening is made by thinning the blood and its wateriness; and in the second, by a careful extraction of thick blood.
But if the blood is very foul, then let a third bleeding be done so that the last result may follow.
And finally, when we want to extract blood gradually or a little, one bleeding is enough for us. But if we want many extractions of blood, we make many bleedings.
And if we measure that the blood is thick, then it must be bled deeply; and the equal end in bleeding, is the depth of the skin.
What should be administered from oils at the placement of cupping and what should a cupper beware of?
Indeed, for one whose skin is thick, hard, dark and whose pores are tight, it must be anointed with opening, softening, resolving oils; if it is in the summer season, such as oil of alkane or oil of violets or oil from sweet almonds or oil from pumpkin seeds.
And if it is in the winter season, then narcissus oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or syrup oil and those similar to them.
But if the excess is thick and cold then let the oil be bitter almond, or oil of balsamic, or white oil, or anise oil and those similar to them.
But if the cupper is for those with open pores and tender flesh, then oil must be prohibited, and they must wash the cupping places afterwards with rose water, or cold water, or sun water, or pumpkin water, or purslane water, and similar to them.
He whose blood is of much humidity should wash with vinegar, or myrtle water, and sumacs, and the like.
But he who has thick superfluities should wash his wounds with old wine, or with samsuck water, or a decoction of anise, or chamomile, and the like.
And it is necessary that washing be done in a bath, or in the track of a bath, indeed it is necessary that it be given after leaving the bath for an hour, or for two hours.
And no one should sleep after washing.
What is it by which the wind-remover, or phlebotomist should be regulated before washing?
And after that it is necessary for you to consider first, then if the wind-remover or phlebotomist is choleric and his blood has sharpness and inflammation, then he should take cold things, such as pomegranate juice; and also endive with vinegar and lettuce, and scandibin, and iuleb, and the like.
And make his foods chicks, and boiled eggs, and foods seasoned with sour things; and the like.
And he whose complexion is cold should take syrup of honey, or of almonds, or alsecaniabin made from seeds; and take fragrant wine which is between old and new; and be directed to use a small amount of food. And make his food chicks, and canaries; and sparrows, that is, small birds; and dove chicks.
And it is necessary that drink on the day of washing and phlebotomy be more than food; and it is necessary that in some people a tyriaca alfaroch, or medicine from musk, that is, musk, or alesselithe be given in drink before washing, and before phlebotomy, or after: so that the main limbs may be strengthened, and the blood thinned. And it is not necessary for them to take it in a heated drink.
On Winds Without Scarification. But those winds which are without scarification are winds which are placed upon the liver and spleen and podagra and upon the belly, navel, and places of the kidneys, and the thick ankle; because these members do not suffer scarification upon themselves.
And it is not sought through them except an attraction of blood from a member to a member; such as we place a cupping glass upon the nipples in the sickness of a discharge of blood from the nose. And we use them so as to loosen cold and invisible windiness in a member; such as we place a cupping glass upon the belly and navel. For it thins the member and warms it and removes the pain therefore because it has resolved that windiness.
It is also placed upon the kidneys when there occurs a stoppage or a stone in them. For by its power of attraction it perhaps opens the stoppage or removes the stone from its place.
And similarly it does when placed upon the liver and spleen in order to ward off windiness in both.
And these cupping glasses are administered empty with incision only. And sometimes they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered full of warm water in illnesses of pleurisy; and this is so that the cupping glass should be filled and be large with hot water alone or with water in which herbs have been boiled which are suitable.
On the Form of a Cupping Glass Administered With Fire.
Let the width of its opening be two fingerbreadths open, according to what we have formed; and let its depth be half a palm; and let there be on its side in a place which is around its middle a small hole according to the quantity by which a needle may enter it. Make it from brass or bronze, thick rims, smooth, equal, polished: so that it does not injure the member at its position upon it; and let there be in the middle of it a crosswise rod from brass or iron where a candle with fire is placed.
And now this is made large and airy, greater than we have described, and slightly smaller than that, according to the illnesses and age of him who uses it.
For cupping glasses of children and thin people are different than cupping glasses of men and fat bodies.
The quality of placing this cupping glass with fire on a limb is to light a flax wick with fire from linen, or a small candle from beeswax; and place it over the middle of the transverse rod which is in the middle of the cupping glass: so that the fire is ignited around the lower part of the cupping glass, so that the body of the sick person is not burned.
Then place it on the limb; and a finger should be on the hole which I mentioned, until whenever we hold the cupping glass: while we need to, we remove the finger, and vapor will exit over that hole, and the cupping glass will be released immediately.
Then light the flax wick according to its manner, and repeat it if you need it.
But the cupping glass which is administered in the illness of pleurisy with water, does not have a transverse rod, nor a hole; and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and placed on the limb only.
And this is its form.
And this cupping glass, the larger it is, so that it takes a lot of water, is better.
Concerning the Suspension of Bloodletting Instruments.
Bloodletting instruments are not administered in many, unless in those limbs in which the position of cupping glasses is not possible due to their small size, such as the lip, and gum, and those similar. Or in a limb stripped bare of flesh, such as a finger, and nose, and those similar.
And the quality of using them is: that you should come from bloodletting instruments which are in sweet waters, clean from decay.
Then they should be immersed day and night in fresh water until they are lean and there is nothing left in their bellies. Then the body should first be evacuated with bloodletting and with enemas. Then wash the limb of the sick person until it reddens. Then place them upon it.
When they are therefore full and fall off, and suction of the place is possible with an enema, then this is the best method for healing; and if not, then wash the place with vinegar. Then with plenty of water, rub it and squeeze it.
But if the flow of blood continues after the falling off of the bloodletters and it oozes, then infuse a cloth of flax into cold water and place it on top until the oozing is stopped.
But if the blood increases, then sprinkle powdered tragacanth or gallnuts and things similar to these astringents on top until the bleeding is stopped.
Or place bean halves that have been skinned on the spot and leave them until the beans adhere to the spot, for the blood will be stopped.
And it is necessary if a repetition of the bloodletting is needed, to change them when possible.
But if the bloodletters are prevented from sucking, then wash the place with fresh blood. Or insert a needle into the place until something comes out of the blood. Then place them, for they themselves when they sense something from the blood, will adhere immediately.
Therefore when you wish for them to fall off, sprinkle something ground from aloe, or salt, or ashes on top of them and they will fall off immediately.
This chapter is also very often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures, and dislocations of accidents in bones.
Know ye, O Sons, that foolish physicians and the common people boast of this chapter, who have never looked upon an ancient book, nor read a letter from it.
And for this reason it is that this method, from the sciences, is private in our land. And I never found anything good in it at all, and I did not obtain from it what I obtained except for the length of reading ancient books, and study upon their understanding, until I extracted the knowledge of it from them.
Then I adhered to experiment and the length of study in my life.
And now I have described to you from it in this chapter everything that contains my knowledge: and upon what passed experiment mine, after I abbreviated it for you, and freed it from the occupation of elongation, and abbreviated it without abbreviation, and showed it without declination: and I formed in it many forms from the forms of instruments which are administered in it, with being from the addition of declination, just as I did in the two preceding chapters.
Head II.
It is necessary that we say in the prologue of this chapter, summaries of speech and chapters, to which intellect the craftsman is compelled in the first place for station upon their truth: namely so that you, and those who are ready, may know or learn this noble art, and others from you.
I say, therefore, that when it happens to someone a fracture, or dislocation, or torsion, or a fall: then it is necessary that you hurry first to let blood from him, and loosen him, or both together: if nothing prevents it, such as weakness of power: or he is a child or a decrepit old man to whom it has happened: or it is a time of intense heat, or very intense cold.
Then let him be content with his food, cold herbs, and poultry and kid meats; and forbid wine, and fatty meats, and to be filled from foods and all food which fills the veins with blood. Until when you are safe from the hot abscess, and do not fear the effusion of matter to the limb: then let the sick man return to his first regimen with which his custom ran.
Therefore when a broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the sick man eat foods nourishing with much nourishment, thick, heavy, in which there is viscosity: such as food made from cooked wheat with water, and rice, and heads, and feet, and entrails of cows, and eggs, and fresh fish: and thick wine, and things similar to these. For with this regimen coagulation of the fracture happens more quickly, and better.
And know that broken bones, when they are in those who are in the first old age and decrepit, it is not possible that they continue and are consolidated according to their nature always, because of the drying up of their limbs: and those which are consolidated and continued from them are at the end of their tenderness, such as the bones of young children.
Truly nature annexes upon a broken bone from every part something similar to glue, in which there is thickness, so that it adheres and binds itself, until they are joined together and are bound together, until it comes into the end of strength and firmness, as it was at first, until it does not prohibit anything from its operations: and for this reason it is necessary that you put nourishment of the sick man with foods in which there are heaviness, viscosity, and thickness, as we said.
And know that fractures are of different kinds, according to the diversity of limbs: for a fracture of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the breastbone is different from a fracture of the back bone; and similarly all other limbs are different from each other: and I came with the recollection of every kind of fracture exposed in its own Chapter, distinguished from another. And the kinds of bone fractures are also diversified among themselves.
For it happens that its fracture is arched, besides which stars occur in it. And sometimes its fracture happens according to the length of the bone; and there are its fractures that are splintered, that is, stars, and additions proceeding, such as are in a reed pen, when it is fitted with a knife for writing. And not proceeding; and there is a fracture with a wound and a disruption in the head; and there is a small fissure fracture.
And to each species there is an ingenuity or instrument proper to its restoration, according to as its remembrance will come, distinguished in its places.
And from that by which a bone fracture is recognized, it is its crookedness and its prominence; and its appearance to the sense, and its sound when you compress it with your hand.
When therefore there is no apparent crookedness in the place, nor a sound at your touch when you touch the bone with agitation, nor does it find great pain: then there is no fracture there; but it is possible that there is crookedness or a small fissure. Therefore it is not necessary that you move it with your hand and compression altogether, but rather lay upon it from medicines of which its remembrance will come after that moment which suits the place; and then let a fine bandage be applied.
And know that when a place arches and splits into two, besides which splinters occur in it; nevertheless every part is removed from its companion: then it is necessary for you to begin from your hour to its rectification, equalizing it before an inflammatory swelling comes upon it.
But if an inflammatory swelling should come upon it, then let it alone for several days until the swelling subsides. Then equalize it according to whatever method is possible from gentleness and ingenuity.
And know that its restoration and equalization is easier than that of a bone in which splinters occur.
Then bind it according to how you will remember it.
But if there are splinters in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this fractured limb from two parts, if it is the hand or foot; or with your hand, if the limb is small; or with two cords, or with a cord and hand.
And let your position be such that you place the limb on an equal surface, according to its natural shape, until when the parts of the fractured limb are extended; then try to return those additions with all your ingenuity, and in whatever way you can into their places; and beware, according to your strength, lest pain or injury befall the weak one during your operation; and try, according to your strength, to apply one of the two bones with its companion, according to the better forms.
And it is necessary at that hour for you to try and touch it with your hand. If therefore you see something different there, correct it, and equalize it according to the amount of your strength.
And beware of vehement extension and strong compression, as many stupid people do. Very often they cause a hot abscess or contraction to occur in the limb through their operation, as we have already seen that often from their operations.
Then bind after the setting and decent operation and constriction of that limb, and quietude and peace; and warn the weak one about it. And make him beware not to move it in the hour of his vigils and sleep during his turning and stirring and at elimination, and all his movements with the last of his strength. And that he should beware so that the position of the limb is not one with which pain follows. Which is because when he feels pain or injury in the position of the limb, then it is necessary for you to change it to another position from which he does not feel pain.
And be careful with it, so that its position is equal and straight, so that torsion does not occur in the limb when it is restored.
And the quality of the constriction of the fractured limb is, according to what I describe.
Know that fractured limbs are differentiated by their number, and their size, and their form.
Those of them which are small, such as the arm, and the finger, and the calf, and those similar to them, then it is necessary that there be an envelopment of soft, fine cloth. Those which are large, such as the hip and leg, it is necessary that there be a broad, firm envelopment in them.
Because a broad bandage connects the large limb and constricts it from every part with equal pressure, so that no blemish enters it.
Then begin after your evacuation from equalizing to place a suitable unguent on it, in a soft pledget over the place of its fracture. Then begin to enwrap the bandage over the place of its fracture with three or four wrappings, according to what the limb deserves, and constrict your hand a little with the bandage.
Then go with it to the upper part from the place of the fracture and constrict less than the constriction which you made at the fractured place. Then extend yourself with the wrapping from the fractured place a little and soften the constriction gradually until you take a great thing from the sound place.
Then take another splint and wrap it again over the fractured place with wrappings. Then go with the wrapping to the lower part from the fracture. And let your operation be in the constriction of the wrapping and its softening, according to what we said in the first upper wrapping.
Then place between the wrappings some soft pledget or cloth with which the torsion of the fracture may be equalized if there is torsion in it; and if not, do not put anything in it.
Then wrap another bandage over it. Afterwards, immediately place even stars upon these wrappings, if there is neither swelling nor hot pus in the area.
But if there is swelling or pus there: then place upon it something which will draw out that pus and remove the swelling; and leave it for several days. Then bind stars upon it at that time.
And let the stars be made from strips of cane, wide, planed, and cleverly shaped; or they may be made from wood from which strainers are made, such as pine or boxwood, that is, palm branches, or calamus reeds; and let the width of each star be according to this form and shape.
However, it is necessary that the star which is placed upon the wound itself be somewhat thicker and wider than the other stars; and the length of the star should be according to what is fitting for the limb in size and smallness.
Then bind the stars with another bandage, according to the same first binding. Then bind over it with threads evenly, according to what we said about binding; and let your binding be tighter over the place of the fracture; and the further it is from the fracture, the looser the binding should be.
And it is necessary that the threads be of medium thickness and fineness, and are made from soft linen.
For if the threads are thick, as I have seen from the practice of stupid people who put their own threads made from twisted linen cords, it is a great error; because the binding falls apart with them beyond quality.
And again, fine threads are not suitable: because you do not achieve what you want through binding with them.
And it is not necessary that there be less than a finger's width between star and star.
And if a weak person is injured at the ends of the stars after binding in healthy places; then put under them some soft tow or carded wool until nothing is hurt by it.
When there is a fracture with a wound, and disruption occurs in the skin, I will come with remembrance of it in the second chapter singularity.
And you should know that not every fractured limb ought to be bound with splints from the first day. For this is because when a limb is large, it is not necessary to put splints on it unless after five days, or seven, or more, according to your safety from the event of hot inflammation.
And this is the method of plasters, with which the ancients restored, which are put on fractures and dislocations.
Method of a common shortened plaster, restoring a fracture, suitable for many complexions, especially women and children, because it is temperate, neither hot nor cold.
And it is as follows: you take from the flour mill powder, which is the medulla of grain that hangs on the walls of the mill at the movement of the millstone; and you prepare it as is, except that you sieve it with egg white: and put the confection of it neither thick nor thin. Then use it.
Method of another plaster, restoring a fracture, and dislocation, and torsion. Take almonds, and opium, and acacia, and enulacampane, and mugwort; and juice of all, each ten drachmas; myrrh and aloes, both five drachmas each; and alethil twenty drachmas, let them all be ground, sifted, and mixed with alethil water: or with egg white if the complexion of the sick person is hot. Then use this plaster. For it is of good composition, restores broken bones quickly, and benefits many people.
Method of another plaster which also benefits fractures and torsions. Take mugwort, and mess, and white alteae, all ten drachmas each; myrrh and aloes, both five drachmas each; acacia six drachmas; armenian bole twenty drachmas; let them all be ground with much pounding, sifted, and prepared with water or egg white; and let them be administered.
Method of plaster for joints, and separated bones from their places: and it soothes the pain happening to them, and the crack of bone, and the fracture. Take wool that has been squeezed dry, and submerge it in vinegar, and boiled oil: and place it upon the location.
And in this indeed plaster there is no power of restoration, but it is good in the soothing of a hot abscess: and it expels pains properly.
Method of plaster which restores a broken bone. Take leaves of the deaf fig, and leaves of the wild poppy: and grind all, and make a plaster from both.
Method of shortened plaster, administered at the restoration of a bone fracture: and when you wish the resolution of a remaining abscess. Take root of althea, and chamomile, and flowers of violets, and flour of herb, all of one part: grind all, and make them with wine, if the member is not heated.
But if it is heated, then make it with water of humid coriander, or with water, and use it.
Method of another stronger plaster in the resolution, than this first, when there occurs a hard abscess at the restoration of a limb. Take root of althea, and flaxseed, and balaustium, and melilot, and samsuck, and flower of violets, and chamomile, all of one part, grind all, and make them with willow water, or with sweet water, or with wine. All that according to the heat of the limb, and the rest of its heat.
However, Hippocrates did not say in his book, that one should place upon a fractured limb at its restoration, except a plaster made from wax, and oil: nothing else: and he related, that it should be a medium between thickness and thinness.
Galen thought that for the restoration of a broken limb things should be placed upon it in which there is dryness of heat, such as myrrh and aloe and frankincense, and things similar to them from those which we have mentioned.
Method of a Plaster Which Brings Together the Injury and Pain. Take mugwort and chickpeas and hairs of a man cut short or a bird's feather, and altea and salt in equal parts; grind them, and sift them, and make a plaster from it.
The quantity however according to which it ought to remain so that the ligature is then loosened is this, that you consider at that time whether there does not occur a weak pain nor itching nor is the fractured bone moved from its place; then do not loosen it for many days. But if a vehement itching occurs to it in its place, or an unsettling pain, or swelling; then hasten and loosen it within the hour, and remove the plaster from it; and take soft linen or a soft sea sponge, damp: and submerge it in lukewarm water and wash the place with it until the itching subsides and the pain ceases.
But if a vehement itching occurs to it in its place, or an unsettling pain, or swelling; then hasten and loosen it within the hour, and remove the plaster from it; and take soft linen or a soft sea sponge, damp: and submerge it in lukewarm water and wash the place with it until the itching subsides and the pain ceases. Then let the limb rest for one hour. Then place wool cut up soaked in vinegar and oil or rose oil upon it; and bind for one night until you are secure from a warm abscess and the swelling of the limb subsides and its pain is removed.
Then repeat it to a subtle tightening and a small plaster; and do not bind it tight with your first binding and a subtle one with it until it is healed.
But if you see that the abscess and redness and pain and swelling and all accidents have now been entirely removed and the plaster and binding are no longer needed; then repeat it as you did at first equally.
But if nothing of those things which we have said happens to the limb, then do not loosen it except after three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when that which is sent away for twenty days has completely adhered according to what appears to you from the resolution of the limb, as we have said, until when the fracture adheres and the coagulation of the flesh approaches it: add then also in the strapping more than your first whole strapping; and add also in the thickening of food for the weak, according to the preceding remembrance thereof.
But if you see the place of the fracture already drying out and wasting more than it should: then know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching it. Therefore embrocate it with warm water at every time you loosen it, and let it be so for three days, and relieve the strapping a little.
Through this operation nourishment runs to the limb and heals quickly.
That which foolish restorers do from a fractured limb with another vice, when it is not restored at first according to what is right, and it is restored according to crookedness, is an error from their operation, and great fear: and if it were right, the ancients would have said it in their books, and they would have operated with it.
And I have not seen any trace of them anywhere at all in that matter, and it is better that it should not be done.
Concerning the making of an accidental injury to the head.
The kinds of fractures are diverse and their figures are many: and the causes thereof are distinct.
For from a fracture is that which happens from a blow with a sword: and the blow takes away the whole bone until it reaches the siphac, which is under the bone, just as an axe does in wood: and on account of that this species of fracture is called Axial.
Or a sword strikes a certain bone and strikes its face and the incision does not penetrate to the very end thereof: and this species of fracture is called Kalaan, that is, Elevation entirely.
And it is a wound of two fractures, either large or small.
And from fracture is that which is a crushing, or grinding; and its cause is a blow with a stone, or a fall onto a stone, or things similar to these.
And this fracture is also either penetrating, which already approaches the panniculus, which is under the bone; or it is on the face of the bone; and the wound of these two fractures is also either small or large.
And from fracture is that which is hidden in the bone in the subtlety of a hair; and it is a small fissure, and on account of this this species of fracture is called Capillary.
And from these is a fracture which occurs from a fall, or a blow of a stone, and things similar to these, which cause the lamina of the bone to enter inwards, and a cavity is made in its place; just as it happens with caldrons of air, when a blow strikes them, and a part of them enters inwards.
And very often indeed this happens in the heads of soft bones, such as are the heads of children.
And all these species of fractures are separated by sutures, and I will come with a remembrance of the whole of it in its place.
And we recognize all these species of fracture by probing upon it, and inquiry into them with probes, and removal of corrupted flesh which are upon them.
The species Capillary, however, is recognized by this, that it is probed upon the bone, and cleaned away, and polished upon it with a cerate; for the fracture appears black.
But in the treatment of a fracture, consider first the accidents of the sick person; then if you see from the accidents that it signifies with manifest indication fear, such as vomiting cholera, and extension, and loss of intellect, and stoppage of voice, and syncope, and acute fever, and egress of eyes, and redness of them, and things similar to these accidents in many dispositions, without a doubt it will not be healed; and if you see accidents which are not terrifying to you, and you hope for salvation: then begin its treatment.
What it is, if he comes to you wounded at first when he is wounded: and that is in the winter days, then it is necessary that you strive in the removal of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all arrangement.
And if it is in the summer days, then it is necessary that you hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, before that which is under the bone from the fatty tissue is corrupted, and those accidents which we have related occur.
And if the fracture of the bone has already reached the fatty tissue touching the brain, and it is with small particles, and attraction: then it is necessary that you cut into the crushed and rubbed part, according to what I tell you.
And it is necessary that you shave the head of the wounded man: and expose above the bone according to whatever way is possible for you: and according to the shape of the wound, and what is light upon the sick person.
And if it should happen to you at the exposure of the bone a flow of blood, or a hot abscess: then oppose it with that which is necessary. And it is necessary that you fill the place with cloths dipped in wine and rose oil: and make the wound rest, until the abscess settles, and you are safe from the flow of blood. Then begin in the healing of the bone, and its removal.
And that is done according to one of two methods.
The first method indeed is to cut into the bone with an incised strict blade: and this is its form.
Then apply another incisor after the incisor somewhat wider: and this is its form.
Then apply also another incisor even wider than the second.
And the second method is that you have at hand a number of diverse incisors: some of which are wider than others, and some of them shorter than others: and they are sharp at their last extremities, and are made of steel, or iron: and use ease in percussion above the incisor so that it does not shake the head and injure it.
If the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary to perforate it around its circumference before you apply the cutting instrument, with awls which are called non-penetrating awls; they are not so named unless because they do not pass through the thickness of the bony substance to that which is beyond it. For this reason the awl has a rounded end above that which is below its sharp point, similar to a margin, and a small circle prevents submergence and passage through the thickness of the bone.
And it is fitting for you to take a large number of these awls, each of which suits the thickness of the bone, until you have an awl present for every skull: whose sharp end in length and shortness should be according to the quantity of the thickness of that skull.
And this is the form of three kinds of awls, or trepans.
The quality of perforating around the broken bone is: to place the awl upon the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has already been penetrated. Then change the awl to another place and put what is between every hole a quantity of the thickness of the radius, or approximately that.
Then cut with cutting instruments what is between every hole from the bone; and make it more subtle than you are able above that which is at its end, as we said, until you eradicate the bone, either with your hand or with some other instruments which you have prepared for this: such as tenaculum forceps and fine pincers.
And it is necessary that you be cautious with all care lest the awl or cutting instrument touch anything of the meninges.
When therefore you have gone around the bone perforating and it has been separated from the meninges if it was continuous with them and you have extracted it, it is necessary that you shave and smooth the extremity of it which remains in the bone with another instrument similar to a cutting instrument. However, it is necessary that it be thin and more delicate than other cutting instruments.
And if anything remains of the small bones and splinters, then take them with ease using what instruments you have. Then treat the wound afterwards with linens and ointments as we have said.
And another method of surgery is easy, altogether far from fear, which Galen said and praised it with great praise; and this is his word. It is necessary for you first to begin by exposing the part of the bone from the place where the fracture is more violent and apparent; until when you have exposed that part, and placed under it the extremity of this lenticular cutting instrument, which has this form.
And the lenticular part, being smooth, does not cut anything; and its sharp part on both sides thereof extending in length, as you see; so that the lenticular part be applied to the bone, with its face incident acutely on the bone.
Then strike upon the cutting instrument from one side with a small mallet until you cut through the whole bone easily, as it revolves; and you be secure from the pannicle, that what you fear does not happen to it altogether.
And if the physician were not more stupid than men, and ignorant of it, nor were he sleeping, then if anything remained attached to the bone from the pannicle in some places, he would cut it away from it with the extremity of his lenticular cutting instrument, and free it with ease. For it is freed from it without harm, and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate as far as the panniculus, and what is cut away from the bone is its surface, and roughness and subtle splinters remain in it; then it is necessary that you shave away that roughness, and eradicate those splinters with subtle rasps from which you have prepared a number of different sizes, so that it be possible for you to administer from them in every suitable place more convenient ones, and straighter ones, according to that which the operation leads you to, and the fractured bone itself, and its figure. And it is necessary that you administer in your reasoning, which first roots out the mouth, wider than those razors. Then use after it a more subtle one.
And it is necessary that you administer in your reasoning, which first roots out the mouth, wider than those razors. Then use after it a more subtle one. And do not cease to do that according to continuity, until you arrive at administering a thinner and more subtle one of them all.
But in every one of the remaining small fissures and subtle fractures, it is necessary that you administer care according to that which leads to its correction.
And it is a thing that is not concealed from anyone who has any study whatever in this art, and has stood upon that which we have written and shown in large fractures.
But if the panniculus that is laid bare is retained when you root out the mouth: then it is necessary that you take a linen cloth according to the quantity of the wound and submerge it in rose oil, and place it over the orifice of the wound. Then take another cloth doubled or tripled and submerge it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth: and do that as easily as you can over it so that it does not weigh down the siphac.
Then administer a wide ligature over it: and do not tighten it except by the quantity which holds the wound only: and leave it with this care for one day or two days until you are secure from hot abscess. Then loosen it and administer afterward medicines with which there is superfluous dryness such as lily roots, herb flour, frankincense powder, aristolochia and similar to them: and it is necessary that you make a powder from these medicines, which is powdered over the wound as they are dry.
And universally administer in it every medicine of a property which is to cleanse and not bite. And beware according to your virtue that the wound be clear in your healing: and there be neither filth of ointment nor dirtiness in it.
And beware according to your virtue that the wound be clear in your healing: and there be neither filth of ointment nor dirtiness in it. Do not allow pus to collect on it at all: for when pus gathers upon the membrane of the brain, it corrupts it and putrefies it, and there follows upon the sick man thereafter a great ill. And this has already occurred in the skull, when the opening is cleaned from it, especially when its care is neglected, blackness arises on its surface.
Therefore consider then, if accidents happen to the sick man which we have said, know that it is undoubtedly pernicious.
And if blackness does not occur except from the medicine which is put upon it, and it is in the power of that medicine to make that blackness: then it is necessary that you take one part from honey, three parts from rose oil, and lines with them a cloth. Then place it upon the skull: afterwards care for it with kinds of treatments which suit, until it is healed.
Concerning the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken except its two upper parts together, or one of them: forasmuch as it itself has two bones: because the lower part of it is cartilaginous, it is not broken and there does not happen to it except attrition, crookedness, and bruising.
If one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary that you introduce a small finger into the nostril and equalize that fracture with your index finger, and thumb outside until the nose returns to its natural shape: and let this be done artfully, with ease. And be careful that during your operation, that pain does not befall the sick man.
But if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and the finger does not reach it: then it is necessary that it be equalized by the extremity of a radius, in which there is a small thickness.
But if the fracture is in both parts, then do the same as that: and hasten with its restoration on the first day of the fracture, if it is possible. And if not, then after the seventh or tenth day, apply a warm poultice at rest.
Then introduce into the extremity of the nose a linen wick if the fracture is in one part; or introduce two wicks if the fracture is in two parts; and let it be of such thickness as to fill the nostril.
And some ancient restorers have said that the wicks should be steeped in butter and changed every day. But that does not seem right to me; rather, the wick should be steeped in egg white mixed with powdered starch. Then leave the wick until the mouth is set and the cartilage hardens.
And sometimes a goose feather is introduced into the nose in place of the wick after it has been wrapped in a soft cloth; and this holds the nasal fracture more firmly and so that the weak person is not prevented from breathing.
And this is not necessary. If you wish, do that; and if you wish, use wicks.
If it should happen that the nose breaks again while you are working on a hot poultice, plaster the nose with carrot or with quince infused in rose oil, or a little from dragon's blood.
But if there is no hot poultice, then it is necessary that the plasters be made with sesame flour and frankincense powder mixed with egg white. Then place a soft swab on top of it and do not bind the nose in any way at all.
But if the nasal bones are fractured in small pieces or crushed, then it is necessary that you split them apart and remove them with instruments suitable for the purpose. Then suture the incision and care for it with plasters or ointments suitable for that purpose until it heals and unites.
If a wound should occur between the nose, then it is necessary that you heal it with ointments and apply a tube of lead until it heals.
On the restoration of the lower jaw, when it is broken.
When the lower jaw is broken and the fracture is not with a wound, then observe if its fracture is only outward, and it is not broken into two, and curves inward: then its recognition is easy.
Therefore it is necessary that if its fracture is on the right side, that you insert the index finger of the left hand into the mouth of the infirm: similarly if the fracture is in the left jaw, then insert the index finger of the right hand; and press with it the gibbosity of the fracture inward with ease to the exterior with your other hand from the inner part of the bone decently, and equalize it with it.
But if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two, then it is necessary that you apply extension from both parts, according to straightness: until its equalization is possible.
But if there should already occur a concussion or disruption in the teeth: then bind those from which you hope that they will remain with gold thread, or silver, or silk. Then place a cerecloth over the fractured jaw. Then place a doubled cloth over it, and put a large well-made starched bandage over the cloth: or a piece of leather equal to the length of the jaw.
Then tie it from above according to how its binding is prepared for you and suits its application until it is not destroyed, and order the infirm person to be in tranquility and quiet; and have their food be mild draughts.
But if you think that something is already changing in some way: then hurry and untie it on the third day. Then straighten what has been altered from it and plaster it with powder of millstones, with lime water, or with sesame flour after you have removed the cerecloth; and put soft wool over the plaster.
Therefore while that plaster remains applied over it and the bone's position is not changed, leave it alone until it heals or bind the fracture. This fracture is often bound in three weeks.
But if a hot abscess should occur meanwhile, then administer that which we have often said in its treatment until that abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is with a wound, consider it. For if now a fragment is separated from the bone or from the sinews, then take great care in this so that you remove those fragments of sinews with what is fitting for you from instruments in their removal.
But if the wound opening is narrow, then enlarge it with a phlebotomy according to the amount of your need.
Then when you have removed those sinews and nothing remains of them, suture the wound opening if it is wide; and if not, apply over it one of the plasters which are suitable for that, and let it become incorporated until it heals.
On the restoration of the Furcula when it is fractured.
The Furcula is most often fractured from the front part from the shoulder and its fracture occurs according to one of three ways.
For it is either fractured and separated into two, besides which sinews occur in it; and this is easier for its restoration.
Or so that sinews occur in the bone; and this is more difficult for its restoration.
Or so that it is a fracture with a wound.
And the operation on it when the fracture is without a wound is that you have two assistants present, so that one of them holds the following fractured Furcula and the other extends the neck towards the side.
Then equalize the fracture with your fingers until its form is made as it should be and there be neither prominence nor concavity in it.
If the extension is not sufficient, it is necessary to place a sphere made of cloth or wool under the fork of the fractured limb; and its size should be according to the amount needed: extend and raise the fork and constrict the sphere with your hand until you equalize the fracture as required.
If you cannot draw the extremity of the fork outwards because it has reached a depth, then it is necessary for the patient to be laid on his back and for a medium-sized cushion to be placed under his shoulder, and for an assistant to press his shoulder down until the mouth of the fork which is in the depth is raised upwards; and then straighten the fracture and equalize it with your fingers.
But if you feel a splinter from the fork and it moves, then you must split it above that and extract the splinter easily.
But if it is held fast in the bone, then apply ingenuity in its incision with one of the incisors which you have prepared for that purpose after placing under the fork an instrument which retains the splinters; and this instrument is made of wood or iron. And this is its form.
It resembles a spoon which has no concavity.
And its width should be according to that which you need from the magnitude of the bone and its parity. Its length however should also be as much as possible for you for the operation.
And it has two extremities, as you see: one extremity is broad and the other narrow.
But if the disruption of the wound which you have made when extracting the bone splinter is wide and you are apprehensive of a hot abscess, then join the two lips of the wound together with sutures.
And if the disruption is small or you fear a hot abscess, then fill the wound with cloths and lint according to the amount of the wound's fissure.
If a hot abscess should occur, then pour a cloth in rose oil, vinegar, and wine, and put it on top of it.
But when a bone stricture is without wound and without incision, apply an embrocation made from mill flour with egg white on the bone. And place a soft pledget on top of it. Then place a sphere under its nipple, if that is needed. Then take a himemat, that is, a wheel which the Saracens hold, which is very long, and let its width be a palm or thereabouts. Then place a doubled cushion on top of the pledget and embrocation. Then take a splint from a thin board, whose width is three fingers, and similarly in length. Then wrap it in cloth. Then wrap that cloth with the splint in the place of the himemat which falls upon the fracture and place. Then place the himemat upon the fracture as it revolves, and wrap it upon its neck, and under its healthy nipple, and under its unhealthy nipple: and reduce it over every part, and as you see that the stricture holds the fracture strictly; and this is that which is not hidden from you, and all so that the splint is not removed from on top of the fractured bone. And for this it is necessary that you look at the weak [person] every day. Whenever therefore the ligament is softened, and you see the splint already moving: then straighten that, and tighten the ligament.
Then place the weak person's sleep upon his back, and put under his nipple at his sleep a small cushion at night, so that it may be raised with him as aid from his side. The fracture of the clavicle is therefore elevated by elevation of the shoulder.
Or bind his arm to his neck: and do not untie the bandage unless itching or an abscess should occur in the place, up to twelve days.
Then renew the plaster if you see his face towards it. And add to the constriction and let him go until it is restored and coagulates.
And indeed a fracture of the clavicle is bound and strengthened for the most part within twenty-eight days: and sometimes it occurs in some men in a lesser time.
On the restoration of a scapula fracture.
The scapula is rarely fractured, and in its wide part: and the margins of it are not broken except from it.
Therefore when a place is broken from it and broken in its middle and it is not known except by touch; then according to what the fracture's shape is, try its preparation. And reduce it to its natural shape in every way possible for your ingenuity.
Then place over the place miller's dust with egg white and a soft swab, and put a poultice of doubled cloth on top. Then place upon it a wide splint from a thin board according to the quantity of the whole scapula, or a little wider.
But if there is a concavity under the splint in any part of the scapula, then equalize it with a soft swab until the splint descends according to equality.
Then bind it on top with a long bandage, with decent constriction and firmness of the splint until it is not removed from its place.
And consider the bandage every day. Whenever the bandage softens, tighten it and equalize the splint if it is removed from its place; and let the patient lie on his healthy side.
And a spatula is indeed restored in twenty days, or in twenty-five days.
When therefore this number is completed, then untie the ligature: and you will be in safety. For it is from bones whose union is not feared, nor their solution.
But if a fragment proceeds from a bone, and pricks under the skin: then split above it, and remove it. And do what we said in the fracture of the clavicle from the repose of a hot poultice, if anything should happen from it.
On the Restoration of a Fracture of the Breastbone.
The breastbone is sometimes fractured in its middle, and this rarely happens. Its extremities indeed are most often broken, and are shattered from its accidents.
When its middle is fractured, which inclines downward, and it suffers violent pain, and difficulty in breathing, and coughing: and perhaps vomits blood, and a concavity is shown in the broken bone, and is not hidden from the senses, Its restoration is, that the weak person lies on their back; and place pulvinar between its spatulas.
Then press its shoulders, and join the ribs from both sides or flanks with hands: and gently bring it into equality, according to every way possible and suitable, until the shape of the bone returns, according to what is necessary.
Then place plaster and a wad on top of it, and put an splint from a thin board of willow, or elder, and those similar in lightness on top, after you have wrapped it in cloth. Then gently bind it over the broken bone, so that it does not move: and go with the bandage according to its roundness to the back several times, and tighten it with a decent constriction.
Then consider the bandage every hour, and whenever it becomes loose, tighten it: and if its necessity provokes its loosening at itching, or corrosion that happens in the place, or pain, or an abscess: then hurry, and untie it, and remove the plaster, and correct what happened with the method of its treatment.
Then apply a plaster if you see that the face requires it, and bind a bandage to it until it is healed.
On the restoration of ribs when they are broken.
Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in thick places which follow the back, and from their extremities on the front side. And attrition does not happen to them unless it is because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from feeling by inquiry with the fingers.
And its restoration is done in such a way that you equalize the fracture with your fingers as much as possible, until the shape is equalized according to what is necessary. Then apply plasters and bind the broken bone with splints if it needs it.
And if the fracture of the ribs is sloping inwards, then there occurs a severe pain and stabbing, like that stabbing which occurs to one who has pleurisy; therefore because the bone stabs the membrane, and also difficulty in breathing occurs to him, and coughing, and vomiting of much blood; and this is a difficult cure.
And the ancients have already devised many ingenuities in this matter; and among them are those who say that you should give the sick person foods which produce inflammation and windiness so that the belly becomes inflamed and expands and the fracture is pushed outwards.
We, however, detest doing this so as not to cause a quick formation of a hot abscess if it does not occur. But if it already occurs, then you add to it.
And some of them said: place something windy on top, and then suck it with force, and this is a similar reasoning. However, it is feared that the windy superfluities draw to the place because of the weakened condition.
And some of them said: it is necessary that the place be covered with wool which has already been soaked in warm oil, and poultices be placed between the ribs until it is filled; so that there is an equal binding when you encircle it according to its roundness.
Then the weak patient should be treated for pleurisy with diet and medicine.
If the illness constricts the patient severely, in a way they cannot tolerate, and their mouth is pierced by the inflamed membrane with a painful sting, and we fear for the patient: then it is necessary to cut above the place and expose the fractured rib. Then we should place an instrument that preserves the sifac upon it, the memory of which has preceded: and we cut the mouth with ease and cut it itself.
Then we should bring together the two lips of the wound if it is large with suture: and we should treat it with plasters until it heals.
If it should happen that a hot abscess occurs then quickly infuse poultices in rose oil and place them upon it: and the patient should be treated with what is suitable for an abscess.
Meanwhile he should also lie on his side upon which he sleeps until he heals.
On the restoration of a fractured vertebra of the back and neck.
A fracture of the bones of the neck sometimes occurs and attrition rarely happens to them; and similarly with the vertebrae of the back. When therefore it happens to someone and you wish to know whether it will heal or not: then consider. For if you see their hands already softened and stunned and dead; and they cannot move them nor extend them nor constrict them; and when you constrict them with your fingers and prick them with a sharp point, they do not feel it, nor do they feel pain in them: then know that it will not heal and is mortal in many dispositions.
But if they move them and feel constriction with the fingers and pricking: then know that the nape of the bone is sound and that the patient will be healed with treatment.
But if it should happen to the vertebrae of the back similarly to that and you wish to know whether it will heal or not then consider their feet: then if you see that they have become softened and what happens in the hands occurs in them; and when he lies on his back, flatulence and excretion exits without volition; and when turned over onto his stomach, excretion exits without volition: and when turned over again onto his back and wishes to urinate and cannot: then know that it is mortal. Therefore do not labor in its cure.
But if nothing happens to him from it, the matter is lighter.
And the treatment of what happens from it is to try calming of a hot abscess so that you place on a tampon ground rose oil alone or with boiled yolks.
Place that on it several times a day until when the hot abscess is calmed; then place on the spot one of the comforting and drying plasters and bind it with a bandage; and order the sick person to use quiet and tranquility. And let him not sleep on the side where he finds pain until he is healed.
But if it happens at the rubbing of a broken bone or something that is already separated from it; then it is necessary that you cut above the skin and take it out. Then bring together the two lips of the wound if it is large with suture. Then care for it with some flesh-colored unguent until it heals.
But if the last bone of the humerus is broken and it is the end of the tail then it is necessary that you insert the thumb of your left hand into the anus and equalize the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible and in a second equalization.
Then place something on it and take it off; and care for the wound with the care that preceded until it is healed.
Concerning the restoration of a shoulder blade.
Chapter XI.
Rarely are the bones of the shoulder blades broken. But if they are broken then their fracture is not except for a fragmentation at their ends and they split lengthwise and lean towards the inside and it happens to the sick person pain in the place and stinging and the limb that is broken becomes numb.
And the restoration of it indeed is to extend your hand upon it until you stand above the fracture as its form is.
If the fracture is only in its extremities, then equalize that fracture, according to what is prepared for you from equation, until it is assimilated to its natural shape.
But if the fracture is in length, or already leans inward: then make the sick person lie on their stomach until restoration of that fracture is prepared for you. When therefore you have equalized it, put a plaster on top of it; then put an splint made of wood or leather on top of it; and bind a bandage over it so that you do not fear displacement of the fracture nor removal of the splint.
And equalize the concavity of those with what fills it, until the bandage takes it according to equality; and order the sick person to sleep on their back or on their sound side.
But if a hot abscess should happen to him: then cease from its extension and its restoration until the hot abscess subsides; and put on top of it what subsided on it, according to what preceded, then return to its restoration and bind it as is necessary.
But if a bone should lodge or be crushed, extract it.
Concerning the restoration of the fracture of the Adjuvant.
The Adjuvant is that which is between the elbow and the head of the Spatula.
If therefore it is fractured, then its restoration is according to one of two methods.
One of which is: that you take a flat piece of wood of medium thickness, according to this shape, which follows.
And two bandages are tied at its two ends.
Then it is suspended from an elevated place; and the sick person sits on a seat. Then let them project their fractured arm onto the wood until it reaches its nipple, in the middle of which the curvature of the wood is attached.
Then suspend something heavy from above it so that the attendant stretches it downwards. Then the physician shall equalize the fracture with his hands at the same time, until the fracture returns as it should be.
And another method is for the sick person to be laid on his back; and suspend his hand from his neck with a ligament. Then order two attendants, so that one of them holds that which is above the fracture with his hands; and that the other holds below it, and each extends towards his own side.
And if you wish there to be a stronger extension, then bind below the fracture with a ligament, and above it with another ligament; and let each of the two attendants extend them towards their two sides.
If therefore the fracture is near the extremity of the shoulder, then it is necessary that one ligament be placed under the armpit and another under the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow; then it is necessary that a ligament be placed above that place and above the elbow itself.
Then equalize the fracture with ease and without labor until when it is equalized as it should be and a good dressing is applied; then bind it if a hot abscess does not occur.
But if a hot abscess occurs, then loosen the binding until the seventh day. And place upon it wool dipped in vinegar and rose oil until when the abscess subsides; then bind it; and the method of binding it is to put a plaster over the fracture.
Then place an envelopment from new cloth over the plaster. Then let him bind his arm upon the support and put his hand open upon his shoulder.
And place cloth and bind it above the support upon the arm so that the arm remains in the place of the stars; if nothing prevents you from it nor anything changes upon it from the broken bone.
If you fear that something might change over you from a broken bone, then use splints; and it is, that you place upon the fracture itself a splint which is wider and stronger than the other splints. And place between every splint the width of a finger; and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with the addition of three fingers on each side.
Then bind above the splints a binding which I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is, that your binding be tighter over the place of the fracture. And the more the fracture lengthens, the looser the binding should be.
Therefore if you see the position of the splints and the binding, as we said, in the hour that you restore the limb immediately do so; and if you fear a hot inflammation, then loosen the binding and the splints until the seventh day, as we said.
Then consider the bandage every three days so that itching or swelling does not occur in the place, nor is food prevented from reaching the limb because of the abundance and tightness of the bandage. Therefore correct the whole thing according to what we said.
But if you are confident that nothing will happen from it, then do not loosen the bandage except after three days or more.
And let the sick person sleep on his back, and his hands upon his stomach; and put under him a full bolster equally padded with wool.
And consider every hour of the night or day that the shape of the broken limb not be loosened, or that the bandage be softened. Therefore correct all this with your skill.
And give the sick person food according to the order which we have previously prescribed, so that it be delicate food at first until his mouth begins to tighten; then it is necessary that you increase his food.
For the custom of the helper and the leg is that it tightens within forty days; then therefore it is necessary that it be loosened and a bath be given and treated with ointments that correct it.
If the fracture is foul and comminuted, then do not remove the ligature and splints from it for up to fifty days, and up to two months.
On the restoration of a fractured arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two humeri.
One of them is small and it is that which follows the thumb. The other is large and it is that which is placed under the smaller one from its lower part.
Therefore perhaps only the larger humerus is broken, or perhaps the smaller one; and perhaps they are broken together.
When therefore the smaller upper humerus is broken, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the lower humerus is broken, its fracture is bad, and its healing difficult.
And it is worse when the two bones are broken together.
If therefore the bone which is broken is the smaller upper humerus, then it is fitting for the physician at its restoration to place a small extension with ease until it itself equals.
But if the larger humerus is that which is broken: then it is necessary that he place a stronger strapping very forcefully.
And it is necessary that he place the shape of the hand at its restoration, and its extended extension upon a cushion. And let the thumb of the hand be higher than all the fingers, and let the lower joint be below all the fingers, or the rest; and let a weak seated square be upon itself, and let the cushion be before it, or in its direction, at a height so that the weak person does not incur labor.
Then let the attendant extend the arm from its lower part, either with his hand or with a bandage. And let another attendant extend it similarly from above.
Then let the physician equalize the mouth, until he reduces it according to as good a form as he is able.
But if there are splinters in the bone fracture, then endeavor to reduce every fragment into its place by your power.
But if a separated splinter appears in it, and pricks the skin, and you have no hope in its restoration: then cut above it, and remove it according to the way we said in those things which were set forth before.
But if the fracture is with a wound, I already made for that a separate chapter, therefore take its treatment from there.
But if a hot abscess should happen at the beginning of your restoration, then make a cloth with cerate made from rose oil, and white wax, and let it be medium between thickness and subtlety; and bind the cloth over it with a subtle binding until when the abscess is subsided: then remove the cerate, and put on a plaster prepared from powder of millpond snails with egg white. Then put on splints, and let the splint that is put over the fracture itself be a little wider, and stronger.
And know that the number of splints for the arm is six in most arrangements: whether the fracture is in one focus, or in two focuses together.
Then put your binding over the place of the fracture stronger and more vigorous, and somewhat more with binding toward the superiors of the fracture, or toward its inferiors: or put a softer binding than its binding a little, according to as the previous recollection of it was in the beginning of the chapter.
And let the cloths that are wound over the fracture be soft cloths, damp: and let them not be hard, rough. And let the thread by which it is bound be flax properly, medium between fine and thick as we have related.
And consider the limb and the bandage after days. And if anything should happen of which correction is needed, such as itching that happens to the limb: then it is necessary, that you embrocate the limb with warm water until that itch subsides, and let the limb go unconstrained until it subsides, then repeat the binding.
If the stricture has already been softened and the mouth already removed, and similar things: then correct all of that with your own skill and consider it again.
For if nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excess stricture, then it is necessary that you soften it a little and let it be for several days until nourishment flows to it, then constrict it.
But if none of the things we have said happen to the weak one, then it is not necessary that it be loosened except after twenty days, or thereabouts.
Then suspend the weak one's hand to its neck. And let its neck be level, and let it be guarded by its own strength from agitated movements. And make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days, or in thirty-two days: and perhaps it is restored in twenty-eight days. All of that is according to the dispositions of complexions, and the dispositions of strength.
On the Restoration of Fractures of the Hand.
Know that fractures of the chest of the hand and of the knuckles rarely occur. And it does not happen to it except through much attrition.
Therefore when a fracture or attrition of the sole occurs: it is necessary that the weak one sits square: and in front of him let there be a seat according to equality. Then place his hand extended upon it.
Then let the attendant extend the broken bones, and let the physician equalize them until they are joined in a good conjunction.
Then it is necessary that he place a plaster and bandage, if hot swelling does not occur. Then place a splint on top according to the quantity of the area: and you have already wrapped it in linen cloth.
If the fracture is about the lower part of the sole near the belly, then make a ball shape from cloth and tell the patient to press it on top of it with his broken foot; then tie it tight with a long strip of cloth.
And let there be a star made from leather, in which there is softness so that the leather may be applied with the body of the foot; and bind it as needed.
But if the fracture is on the outside, then it is necessary: to put a star on top and another star from below onto the sole; and let the hand be open and straight. Then place a binding, as the hand turns, and extend it between the fingers with a bandage.
And if a fracture happens to any of the nodes of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, it should be equalized as needed. Then tie it with the sole; and if you wish, put a small straight star on it so that the fracture is raised and does not move.
But if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the middle, index, or ring finger, then it should be equalized and tied with the healthy finger that follows it; or they should all be tied according to their sequence, and this is better. Or put a small star on top of it, as we said for the thumb.
And consider in your restoration and after the placement of a warm poultice; and oppose it with what is necessary when something happens from it, according to how its account proceeds.
On the Restoration of a Fracture of the Hip.
The hip bone is often fractured, and it is revealed to the senses because it turns towards the inner and rear part.
And its restoration is done in this way: a bandage is tied above the fracture, and another bandage below the fracture. And let the patient lie face down.
Then let the minister extend all the ligament to its part according to equality; and this, when there is a fracture in the middle of the bone.
But if there is a fracture near the root of the hip, then let the ligament be to the part of the pectineus, so that the extension falls upwards; and another ligament under the fracture.
And thus similarly if there is a fracture near the knee, then let the ligament be near the knee, so that the extension is downwards.
Then let the physician equalize the bone with both of his hands until he reduces it according to the likeness of the natural figure; and let the bone be conjoined by a good conjunction.
Then it is necessary that you put on a plaster and strapping, if an abscess does not occur in the limb. But if an abscess occurs in it: then let it alone for several days until the hot abscess subsides, then return to your healing.
And its strapping thus shall be. It is necessary that you envelop over the fracture a hard linen cloth, that is, a bandage; and double it twice, or thrice; and let there remain an excess from it. Then envelop the leg until the heel reaches at the root of the buttock.
And insert a long thread between the hip and leg near the knee downwards; and let the ends of the thread come from the upper part of the two parts. Then revolve over the leg and hip what remains excess from the linen cloth.
Then place on the hip in the place of the fracture itself splints; and place from them one splint over the bone of the leg.
Then fill the voids between the leg and hip with soft cloths so that the strapping is equal.
Then begin with strong strapping from the middle upwards to the place of the fracture with three or four windings. And the more you extend with the ligament from the place of the fracture, let your strapping be smaller and softer, and gentler.
Then attend to the two ends of the thread, which you have inserted between the thigh and the leg. Therefore tie with both three knots which are above. Then go with the two ends of the thread downwards, until you reach the heel of the foot. And with both constrict also the extremities of the knots from the other side, so that the ligature is not removed from its place.
Then release the constriction upon it while it remains so that neither corrosion nor an abscess nor swelling nor anything similar to them may occur to the limb. But if anything of this sort should happen. Then hasten with its solution and rectify everything that happens from it altogether, according to what we have said many times.
But if there is a piece of bone in the bone that is sharp, then it must be made even if it is possible for you to do so. And if not, cut upon it and remove it; and attend to it as we have previously mentioned until it heals.
And whenever this fracture of the thigh is constricted besides the addition of knots to it as we have said in regard to the arm and forearm.
However, in its restoration thus fractured, a weak limp does not occur. And if it is restored alone besides which the other leg is applied, then it is necessary that he who owns it should always limp.
And know that the thigh is constricted for fifty days or a little more or less; all of this is according to the diversity of complexions and other dispositions.
On the restoration of a fracture of the patella.
Know that a fracture of the patella rarely occurs, but attrition happens to it very often.
But if a fracture should happen to it, then it is not unless a fissure or a hole in its parts. And it is with a wound, and without a wound. And it is placed entirely upon that with sensation.
And its restoration is such that it equals what has been broken off from its parts with fingers, until it is gathered together and joined according to what is possible from equality and ease, and making.
Then place a plaster of sesame flour, or miller's flour, with egg white; and place a round star on top of it if that is needed; and bind over it a suitable bandage for that.
Then consider all the arrangements which we have narrated in the other fractures: such as a hot poultice, and things similar to it; so that you oppose every accident with what suits it until it is healed.
On the restoration of a leg fracture.
Know that the leg has two bones, one of which is thick and is called the Tibia; and the other thin, and is called the Fibula.
And it happens to both of these kinds of fractures as it does to the two bones of the arm; and because of this its restoration is done like the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation is one.
If the two bones are broken together, the leg turns in all directions.
And if the thinner bone is broken, the leg turns to the front part.
And if the thicker bone is broken, you will find it lower down; and it is among those that are not hidden from you.
Then administer extension and setting, and binding of stars according to that equally.
However it is necessary, if the leg fracture is a foul one, having many splinters; that there be less extension and gentler alleviation by you.
And in the leg indeed there is something more from the operation than in the arm; and it is that when you set the stars and complete all your operation, then take two strips of pine wood which are used in making sun-dials to be put under tables; and they are made from palm spatulas: and choose from them those which have a small thickness and are not thin ones; and let their length be according to the length of the leg from the knee downwards.
Then wrap each one in a cloth with two wrappings according to its length. And place one part of the leg from one side and the other from the other side; and they shall be from the knee down to below the foot.
Then bind two bandages in three places from the two extremities and the middle. For when constriction is forbidden, the leg inclines to the right and left, and stands in a good position.
And now indeed let a crib be administered from wood according to the length of the leg, and let the leg be placed in it so that it preserves it from movement.
And indeed it is very necessary that you make that in a fracture when it is with a wound properly.
Then consider the leg every day and strive with the utmost care from abscesses or swelling or other things. If therefore anything of those things should happen, then oppose it with what is necessary until it is healed, if God wills.
Of the fracture of the bones of the foot and toes.
A fracture indeed does not occur thoroughly in the heel bone.
But a fracture sometimes occurs in the bones of the foot and rarely also in the toes; and it does not occur to them except by attrition in many positions.
And if a fracture should occur in the bones of the foot and you see those bones elevated above each other, then let the patient place his foot on prepared ground as if walking.
Then stand and place your foot on that which is raised from those bones; then press or step on it and equalize it until it returns to its place.
Then apply a plaster and a wad on top; and place under the sole of the foot a small board which has two flat heads.
Then bind it with the foot with a decent bandage, after you have wrapped it with cloths and other things it needs.
Therefore, when three or four days have passed, then dissolve the ligature. For you will find the bones equalized, whether they are fractured or dislocated. The operation on them is therefore as you see.
But if some fingers are broken, then restore them and equalize them according to what I have told you about the restoration of the fingers of the hand. Then place a splint with your finger according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little wider; then place this board under the foot which I have told you about, and bind it with a decent binding.
But if what is broken from the bones is two, or three, or more, then place a splint of its own size over each finger, wrapped in linen cloth; and bind the board under the foot; and let it stand on one head of the board outside the belly of the foot so that it holds with good retention.
And it is fitting for you not to forget that you consider all that I have told you in the remaining fractures from the accidents we mentioned, and oppose everything with what is necessary.
Concerning the fracture of a woman's vulva, and the breastbone, and a man's rib.
When a woman's vulva is fractured, then make her sit square. Then incline her slightly to the back of herself, and let it be held back.
Then let the midwife fill her vulva with cotton, until she fills it; and let it be made in the vulva like a sphere from it.
Then let the woman be shaken, and raise her back gradually. For the cotton comes out, until it is made like a sphere before the vulva gate, and the broken bone returns.
Then place a poultice on her back. Therefore when he wishes to urinate, let him remove the bandage easily and then urinate; and let him reintroduce it in the same way that you first inserted it; then let him return to his original position.
Let him do this for seven days or so, for the mouth itself is being restored.
And if you wish, take a bladder of a sheep and fasten a reed tube upon its opening, and introduce the whole bladder into his vulva. Then blow into the tube with force until the bladder is inflated within his vulva for the fracture will reunite.
Then let it be filled with lint and let it remain for several days, as we have related, until it is healed.
And when the breastbone of a man or woman is fractured, then apply in its restoration and to its reunion that which we have related in the case of the shoulder blade bone.
And do not conceal the rectum in these neighboring fractures which occur rarely, especially for one who has some skill or practice.
And understand this book of mine well, for the fracture itself indicates to you in many situations the right way in its restoration and its reunion; therefore understand it.
But when the penis of a man is fractured, take the gullet of a goose and insert the penis into it. Then place an application of cloth upon it and let it be wrapped up, and let it remain for three days or so; and it will be healed if God wills.
On the restoration of fractures of bones when there is a wound.
It is fitting for one to whom a fracture occurs with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the hip bone or the femur or similar to those, that you hasten and phlebotomize him immediately; if the conditions of phlebotomy are attested to you as we have previously stated.
If a wound bleeds, then it is necessary that you hurry to cut it off so that powdered charcoal be sprinkled upon it: if you do not have anything else present.
Then begin to restore the fracture on that same day and do not postpone it unless an abscess occurs.
But if a hot abscess occurs, then delay its restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess subsides. And do not approach it on the third and fourth day at all, for you would cause bad things to happen to it.
But if the broken bone is prominent above the skin exposed: then it is necessary that you try to reduce it and equalize it with your hands with little effort and extension.
But if its extension and equalization are not prepared by your hands then reduce it with this instrument. And it is an instrument made of iron, whose length is the quantity of seven fingers or eight and its width is according to the quantity of the wound. And for that reason it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of them according to the quantity needed for its healing in every kind of fracture.
And let it be round and have a small thickness so that it is not doubled upon compression on it during the hour of the operation and let its extremity be sharp with an edge at its ends. And let the upper part of it extend in thickness from its middle to its bottom.
And this is its form.
It is necessary in this operation that the sharp curved extremity of it be placed upon the extremity of the prominent bone and press it with it together until the bone returns and equalizes with some equalization.
Therefore, try to equalize the extremities of the fracture to each other.
But if the extremity of its fracture is slender and does not receive good acceptance from the instrument then it is necessary that you cut into the extremity of that bone until the instrument has power over it.
If you cannot reduce them entirely with what we have said, then cut it with one of the knives which we have mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in any way possible for you.
Then scrape away what remains in the bone from roughness and fine scales.
Therefore, when the bone is reduced and it finds vehement, painful aching after its reduction, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
Do it therefore. For you confer a great benefit on the infirm when you complete your restoration which you make to the bone.
Then immerse a cloth in black astringent wine. Especially if it is summer. And do not place anything on the wound which contains wax or oil; so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption in it.
Then administer splints in the hour following your restoration of the bone. And leave the wound exposed: so that you may cut a hole with forceps in the folds according to the quantity of the wound.
And beware with all caution not to constrict the wound with a fracture. Very often foolish doctors have done this and caused death, corruption or suppuration, that is, discharge, to befall their patients. And let your constriction be soft, gentle, different from the constriction of other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large and you fear some of the evils which we have mentioned may befall it and you find pain suspended in the place then it is not necessary to apply splints over it. And make folds from hard cloths instead of splints and constrict it with them.
But when after a day or two, you see the wound already beginning to form pus in it; then remove from on top of it the cloth which you placed on it with wine. Then apply linen cloths and ointments with which we are accustomed to treat wounds, such as the Tetrapharmacum ointment and those similar to it.
And it behooves you to loosen the ligature. And consider the wound every day in the morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed.
And it is necessary that the limb be prepared so that pus flows from it to the lower parts with ease.
If many days pass and the wound does not consolidate nor is pus separated from it, then know that there are small bone fragments there. Therefore it is necessary to inquire about the wound with touch. However many of those fragments are separated, remove them and extract them. And those which are not separated and prick the limb and cause pain to occur, try to cut into them and remove them in any way possible for you.
But if a wound should happen to develop phlegmon, or erysipelas, that is, eschar, or some other kind of corruption and putrefaction: then it is necessary to oppose to each of these with what suits it from its treatment, of which we have previously spoken in its own chapter.
And in the case in which my speech must stand, and to which you should direct your mind when a bone is broken and protrudes above the limb, such as the hip bone, the femur, and those similar to them from large limbs, it is that you do not presume to draw it out, for very often death results from it; rather, leave it alone until it putrefies.
For perhaps it will fall away by itself after twenty days or thirty.
Then, therefore, care for the wound if it seems right to you; and if not, leave it alone.
Concerning the treatment of a Swelling at the Site of a Fracture.
It often happens that thisNodding occurs in the course of healing a fracture. Especially that which is near the joints; and it spoils the shape of the limb from it. And perhaps it hinders the limb from its natural operation.
Therefore consider then, if the nodding is recent: apply to it medicines which have astringency, such as aloe, and frankincense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, and acacia, and those similar to them.
So that you may take some of these, or all of them; and mix them with astringent wine, or with the white of an egg, or with vinegar; and put them upon the nodding in a pledget, and bind them over it with a good constriction.
And leave the constriction, and do not loosen it for many days. Then loosen it, and repeat another, until the nodding is removed.
Or bind a sheet of lead upon it crosswise. For lead has the property of removing everything that is feared from the limbs.
But if the nodding has already turned into stone, and is tight, and urgent necessity quickly arises to remove it: then make an incision upon its upper part, and cut away the excess that projects; or shave it with certain razors until it is removed; and treat it until it heals.
Concerning the treatment when restored, and the limb remains afterwards slender, not according to its nature.
When a fracture of a bone is restored, and the limb remains afterwards slender, weak; then it does not happen except for many causes. One of which is, the multitude of loosening of the ligature and its ligation not according as it ought; or on account of an excess of constriction of the ligaments, until nourishment be prevented from flowing to the limb; or on account of a multitude of superfluous embrocation in an unseasonable hour; or on account of a scarcity of blood in the body of the sick person, and its weakness.
And its treatment is to feed it weak and soft food, until the blood multiplies within it. And administer a bath. And introduce joy and happiness over it.
Then place pitch on the limb, so that the pitch draws much nourishment to it. And continue its embrocation with warm water, until nourishment flows and it returns to its natural shape.
On the treatment of broken bones when they are restored twisted.
When it happens that after the restoration and healing of a limb, there is a twisting and prominence of the broken bone, or knotting, and the shape of the limb is spoiled, yet nevertheless the limb is not prevented from its natural operation, then you must not heed the one who thinks that the limb should be broken again.
And there have already been many foolish physicians and restorers who have done that in our land.
And this operation is indeed very blameworthy, leading to death, or great fear, so that it may be mortal.
But if the limping and knotting are recent, then it is necessary that it be embrocated with warm water in which softening herbs have been boiled, such as leaves of marshmallow, and its root, and melilot, and those similar to them. And let a plaster be made for it with a softening plaster, such as well-made diachylon.
Or take the mucilage of marshmallow root and mix it with chicken fat or sesame oil and plaster it with that.
Or take fat figs and grind them with dove dung and those similar to them which are called in medicine reducing consolidation.
And sometimes the knot is loosened with diligent, ancient, and gentle friction which is done with wet hands. And let motion be given to the limb in all directions every hour.
But if crookedness has already preceded and become strong and been converted into stone and necessity for its treatment with iron has arisen, then it is necessary that it be cut above it and the continuity of the bone be loosened and what overflows from the knot or bone be incised with fine incisors; and facility be given to it with care and attention.
Concerning speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is the exit of any joint from its place. Therefore it is prohibited from its motion and the figure of the limb is spoiled. And it causes severe pains and vehement injuries to befall the weak one.
Therefore when dislocation happens to someone, then it is necessary to hasten to its restoration and not delay it at all.
For if it is delayed, the place becomes inflamed and perhaps reduction of the dislocation with it.
Therefore it is not necessary that it be moved or extended in the hour of its inflammation. For very often it causes spasms and harmful pains to happen.
But when that happens, then you ought to hasten to the phlebotomy of the weak one. Then let him be dismissed until the inflammation subsides.
Then let the limb be embrocated with warm water and oil. Then let it be reduced with ease.
And let all the limb be treated along with it whose remembrance will come into its place.
I myself have already arranged the chapters of dislocation, even according to what preceded in fracture, from the upper part of the body down to its lower part.
Concerning the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
Rarely do the two jaws dislocate except rarely.
And dislocation of both occurs according to one of two methods. For either they are removed from their places by a small removal and softened for a short time. Or they are dislocated by a complete dislocation until they are softened to the chest, until the saliva of the sick person flows and he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is involved with speech.
When, however, its dislocation is small, then it returns in several positions by itself with little effort.
But if it is a complete, total dislocation, then it must be administered reduction quickly and not delayed at all: and the attendant should hold the head of the sick person: and the physician should insert the thumb of one of his hands into the root of the jaw of the dislocation between his mouth, if the dislocation is from one side. Or he should insert both of his thumbs together, if the dislocation is from two sides. And let the remaining fingers of his hands be outside, with which he equalizes.
And instruct the sick person to cleanse his jaws and release them for eating on all sides. And the physician equalizes the jaw and pushes the jaw until it returns to its place.
But if its reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are together: then administer vaporization with warm water and oil until an easy reduction of both is made: and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we said.
When, therefore, they return and are equalized, and the mouth of the sick person is closed, and they are not softened: then place poultices of cloths on them, with cerate made from wax and rose oil.
Then it is tied with ease with soft bandages.
And let the sick person's sleep be on his back and his head stand between two pillows so that he does not move it to the right and left: nor should he attempt or be forced to chew anything: rather, let his food be a gentle sip until when the pains are removed and the jaw is bound: then let him eat what he wants, and administer it with ease.
Let him not labor over an operation upon his own mouth at eating and drinking and kissing until the mandible is joined and healed.
But if the reduction of the two mandibles becomes difficult when they are dislocated at some hour and do not return to their places; then often fevers and constant thirst arise from this; and perhaps the bowels of the sick man are loosened, and perhaps he vomits pure bile.
Therefore when you see this, know that it is destruction and often he to whom this happens dies in ten days.
Concerning the reduction of a dislocation of the collarbone and extremity of the shoulder.
The collarbone indeed does not dislocate from the inner side because of its continuity with the chest. And it sometimes dislocates to the outer side and that is made clear by sensation.
And its restoration is such that the sick man lies on his back and extends his arms. Then with your palm constrict the place with strong constriction for it will return itself.
Then put plaster on it and lint and bind it tight.
But the extremities which follow the elbow and are continuous with it do not dislocate except rarely. But if it should dislocate on some day then it must be reduced and equalized according to what we said and that which is prepared for you.
Then put plaster on it and lint and a bandage. And advise the sick man to adhere to quiet and rest until he is healed.
And with this same treatment the extremity of the shoulder is reduced when it too is separated from its place.
Concerning the reduction of a dislocation of the humerus.
Know that the humerus does not dislocate except according to three ways.
One of them is to dislocate it towards the side of the fibula below. The second is to dislocate it toward the side of the chest. And perhaps it may be dislocated to the upper part of the humerus, and that happens rarely.
And it does not dislocate backwards, because of the spatula. And it does not dislocate forwards, because of the nerves.
And indeed it most often dislocates and comes out below towards the fibula, especially in those whose flesh is scant. Because it comes out quickly in them and goes back in quickly.
But in those whose flesh is plentiful, it is the opposite of that, namely because it comes out with difficulty and goes back in with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some people that a blow or a fall occurs, and the humerus becomes inflamed with hot inflammation, and it is thought because of that, that it has already been dislocated.
Therefore, you ought to try that until you stand upon certainty of it, and then proceed in its treatment.
And dislocation is recognized when it is below towards the fibula and you distinguish between a dislocated humerus and a sound humerus. For you find a manifest difference between them and you find in the head of the humerus a concavity, and under the fibula at the touch the head of the humerus as if it were an egg itself, and he who is infirm cannot return his hand to his ear nor move it with all motions.
And likewise, if it dislocates towards the chest or upwards then you find a manifest touch and it is not concealed.
And the reduction of this dislocation is easy when it is recent or the infirm one is a boy.
And its reduction is for the attendant to raise his hand upward. Then put your thumbs under his finger, and raise the joint with strength upwards to its place; and let the assistant raise his hand and extend it upwards. Then let him put it below, for he returns quickly.
But if it does not return through what we said and there have been many days from the beginning since the dislocation occurred, then it is necessary that the weak person bathe in warm water, and an embrocation be administered which softens and soothes, such as if the roots of marshmallow, fenugreek, and melilot are decocted in water and administered.
Then let the weak person be laid on his back; and let a sphere and wool be put under his finger, which is equal between softness and tightness.
Then let the physician put his heel on the sphere, and raise the head of the weak person's shoulder with force, and pull the hand of the weak person downwards.
And if you wish, reduce him according to this method; and it is that you make a man who is taller than the weak person be present, and he stands on the side, and inserts his shoulder under the finger of the weak person: and raises the finger upwards until the weak person is suspended in the air. And let another assistant pull the hand of the weak person downwards to his belly. But if the weak person is light, then it is necessary that he be suspended with something else so that it weighs him down; for the dislocation returns immediately.
And it is also reduced according to another method; and it is that a long piece of wood be fixed in the ground, whose head is round in shape: such as a mortar handle: which is neither thick nor thin. Then let it be put under the weak person after soft cloths are placed on top of the head of the wood; and let the weak person stand according to the length of the wood.
Then his hand should be extended downwards on one side and his body extended on the other side with force; for the joint returns to its place quickly.
But if its reduction is difficult by all that we have said, then use this care: and it is that you take wood whose length is the quantity of two arms, and its width the quantity of four fingers, and its thickness the quantity of two fingers; let it have a round head so that its entry into the depth of the joint is eased, according to this form.
Then soft cloths should be tied over the round head so that the wood does not injure the weak limb.
Then place it under the weak joint so that the hand or arm is extended upon the wood up to the lower parts; and bind the wood above the support, the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Then place the arm upon a step of a ladder by its width, and extend the hand downwards, and let the remaining body hang suspended from the other side. For the joint enters immediately.
Therefore when its entry is complete according to whichever way is possible: then it is necessary that you put under the joint a sphere of equal size from wool. Then place a plaster prepared from miller's powder with frankincense and white of egg over the whole shoulder, just as it turns over.
Then bind under the joint with a decent bandage; and let the bandage be wound over the plaster from above; and attach his hand to his own neck and let it go, and do not move his hand for seven days.
And it is necessary that little food be given to the weak one until the limb is strengthened; for this is quicker for its healing.
Then a wider bandage should be placed after seven days or five, and he should be raised with movement. If therefore it is made firm and not softened, then it is now healed.
But if the junction is dislocated many times, because of moisture which happens to it, or because of another cause: then it is necessary that a cautery with three holes be applied to it, according to what has been stated in the chapter on cautery.
But if this whole thing is done, and the ligament is loosened after seven days, and the junction is not confirmed, and the plaster and constriction are applied upon it several times, and it is not made firm, and it falls and cannot be raised to the upper parts: then you will know that its nerves which are at the head of the shoulder have now been cut, or stretched, or softened: and you will know that the junction will never be fixed in its place.
But the dislocation which occurs towards the chest and nipple, or to the back reduction, is made with a push and extension with the hands: until it returns, and the remaining constriction and care are administered to it, until it is healed.
But if it should happen after healing that heaviness occurs in the limb, and slowness in its motion, then let the weak person use a bath many times, until that heaviness is eased and it returns to its former nature.
Concerning the treatment of dislocation of the elbow.
Know that the elbow joint is dislocated with difficulty, and similarly returns with difficulty also: and indeed it dislocates to all sides, and especially to the front, or to the back.
And its dislocation is not hidden from you: because it falls under sight, and under touch, according to whichever shape it may be dislocated. And when you join the dislocated elbow with the sound one, it is declared to you manifestly. For the joint is hollowed, and the arm cannot bend, nor touch its own shoulder with it.
And it is necessary that you hasten and reduce the dislocation immediately, before a hot abscess occurs to him.
For if a hot abscess should occur to him, its reduction becomes difficult and perhaps it will not heal at all, especially when it is towards the back. For it is worse than all kinds of dislocations and more vehement pain to them and very often death descends with it.
And the restoration of it when it is from those which are possible to reduce is that his hand be extended with two hands and that his arm be extended, and the hands of the physician be above the elbow and beneath it, and he himself presses the joint with the thumbs of his hands together or with the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
Or truly the dislocation is to the front: then it returns so that he doubles his hand with his own hand until he strikes with the root of his palm the elbow which is dislocated.
But if the dislocation does not yield to reduction then administer strong, vehement extension and it is that two assistants extend the arm and that two others hold it firm so that it is not moved during the extension.
Then revolve the arm to every part after it has been wrapped with a long doubled cloth or a broad bandage over his hand.
And when the physician touches the joint with his hand let him anoint it with oil so that it may be one of those things which assist in lubricating the joint with ease. Then he presses the joint with a vehement thrust until it returns.
And after its reduction it is necessary that a plaster be placed upon it in which there is astringency and drying with egg white and let it be bound with a decent bandage. And let the arm be suspended from the neck of the sick person and dismiss him for several days.
Then let it be loosened. But if the joint is made firm in its place then untie the bandage from it and dismiss it.
And if you see the junction not well joined, then repeat the plaster, and the bandage, and leave it for several days, until it is joined. Then dissolve it.
But if gravity happens to it after the reduction of the junction, and the disposition is in motion: then administer moisture in a bath, and subtle friction, and compression, until it is lined, or place over the junction iliac fat, that is, the nape of a ram. Then it is tied, and leave it upon it day and night. Then remove it, and introduce it into a bath. When therefore it sweats, then rub the junction with tempered friction. Then repeat over it alizata juice once, and twice, and thrice with the entrance of the bath, until it is softened.
And if you wish, place over it cow dung, moist, heated with butter, and bind above it.
Do that several times. For it is softened, and returns to its disposition.
On the treatment of a dislocation by Al-Zahrawi.
Almassem's hand dislocates very often, that is, the junction which is between the arm and the hand.
And the reduction of his dislocation is easy. Contrary to other junctions. However it is necessary that swiftness be in the reduction of his dislocation in the hour in which it dislocates, before the place swells: or a hot abscess occurs in it.
And the reduction of the dislocation in him is that you place Almassem's hand weak upon a table and let an attendant extend his hand: and let the doctor place his palm upon the eminence of the junction, and push it until it returns.
Nevertheless, it is necessary that consideration be given, if the palm has already receded to the belly of the hand: then let the weak person place the back of their hand upon the table at extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is proceeding to the back of the hand, then let the position of their hand be intrinsically upon the table, that is, the inner part of their hand be placed upon the table so that the hand of the physician may fall upon the eminence of the joint.
If therefore it returns immediately, it is good; and if not, then bind it with a soothing plaster for the abscess, and dismiss him, and do not touch it again.
For if it does not bear, and you are unable to achieve reduction upon it, after days have passed, nevertheless the joint remains according to its crookedness; and it does not harm the weak person anything except that the hand is softened and cannot grasp anything; then know that the nerves are cut or rubbed.
There is therefore no recourse in it except that it be bound with a cautery near its fall. And perhaps it does not contribute anything.
When therefore Almahassem does not return, then put upon it the plaster which we have described. Then let it be bound and dismissed for five days; afterwards let it be loosened and dismissed, and let the hand be exercised.
But if its motion is deprived and some weight occurs in it: then soften it with warm water and repeated friction until it is softened.
On the treatment of dislocations of the fingers.
When a finger is dislocated from them to any part, or a finger from them to the back of the palm, or its belly; then extend the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
Then support the head of the finger and suspend it toward the part to which it is dislocated, and dismiss it for two days.
Then suspend him, and extend it, until the straight one is equal in its day.
Therefore, when it is night, bind it according to the very account; and do not cease to loosen it during the day; and exercise it with motion; and bind it at night.
Do that for several days, until it is tightened.
And do likewise with it if it dislocates towards the belly of the hand; and bind it to the same side, and perform your first operation on it until it is healed.
And do likewise with it when it dislocates to the other parts.
Concerning the treatment of dislocation of the vertebra of the back.
When it happens to someone that the vertebra of the back or neck is completely dislocated, or many vertebrae are moved from their places; then there is no cure for it, because death hastens for the weak one.
And the sign of it is that the excretion of the weak one goes forth without volition, and he cannot hold it; and very often some limbs are softened from it, or two legs, or two arms of his, or one of them; or one vertebra is moved from its place.
Very often, indeed, it is moved, because very often the removal of them happens to four parts.
That which is therefore moved backwards is called Kyphosis.
The treatment of it, however, is that you consider then if the Kyphosis happens from childhood; then there is no cure for it, nor is there healing at all from it.
In that which happens from a fall, or a strike, or similar things to those, the ancients have already said modes of treatment in lengthy speech. Of which most does not return with profit.
I, however, have already shortened it from that, which excuses a little from much of it because of my proximity to intention; and by my exposition in which I exposed it, and shaped its instrument in a different way from that which they showed and exposed it.
Therefore I say that in a hump which occurs from the front part, there is neither skill nor cure from it.
And similarly in that which happens on both sides also.
And it is not cured from them except that which occurs on the back properly, with what I describe; and it is, that he extend infirm above his face above an equal platform near the wall; and let straw matting be spread underneath him so that his chest is not injured.
Then let a straight piece of wood be placed fixed in a hole in the ground, at the extremity of the platform, around his head; and another piece of wood around his feet at the other extremity of the platform; and let an attendant hold the wood, and let it not be fixed in a hole. And let another attendant hold the other one.
Then let a soft, firm bandage be wrapped over the head of the infirm person, and under his shoulders; and extend the end of the bandage to the wood which is by his head; and tie it there.
Then bind another bandage above his hips, and above his knees, and at his ankles. Then bring together all the bandages, and tie them to the other wood which is by his feet.
Then let all the attendants extend their side to the wood bandage; and let the two pieces of wood not be removed from their places where they are fixed; but nevertheless, let them not be fixed, as we said.
And the physician put his palms on the spine with strength, until it returns; or let him put them on a board over it. Then he attaches his feet on a board until it returns.
But if it does not return by this treatment, then take a board whose length is about three arms. And dig a hole in the wall of which we said that it is near the infirm person, a place into which the end of the board may enter. Then place the middle of the board on top of the spine. And let the doctor put his feet on the other extremity. And let him tighten it well until the spine is constricted and returns to its place.
Then if you wish, operate with a tourniquet which is wound with your hand; and it is, that you fix in the ground at the head of the sick man on the last step two pieces of wood, whose length is one arm's length; and at his head on the last step two pieces of wood.
And let the length which is between all the wood be one palm; and now a hole has been made in every place in which the tourniquet runs; and let all the wood be firmly fixed in the ground so that it does not move at all.
And insert a round piece of wood; and it is a tourniquet in which the ligature revolves in two holes of two pieces of wood.
And at its extremity there is a hole in which the wood is fixed, whose length is one palm with that which revolves; and similarly in the two other pieces of wood.
Then tighten the ligatures which you have tightened on the chest of the sick man with the tourniquet which is at his head; and the ligatures which you have tightened on his legs with the tourniquet which is at his feet.
Then let an assistant stand by every tourniquet, who twists his hand with licorice, with which the tourniquet revolves; and the doctor adjusts the spine according to what we have said.
This is the form of the tourniquet, which follows.
Then after the spine returns and the place is leveled, it is necessary that you put a drying plaster with white of egg on it. Then a swab. Afterwards place on top of the plaster a splint from a board, whose width is three fingers or thereabouts. And its length is a quantity that takes the place of the Gibbosity and above the healthy part of the Spine.
Then it is tied with the ligament which we have said. And the weak person should use subtle nourishment until they are healed.
And if something of a prominence remains in the place at the end of healing: then it is necessary that medicines which soften and soothe are administered, with the application of the board which we have described for a long time. And now a sheet of lead is applied to that area.
And sometimes it happens that a prominence occurs in the last vertebra of the back and dislocation is thought to be through it, and that is the bone which has already protruded. Therefore it is not necessary for an assumption to be made about this with this medicine: for it may perchance cause death.
On the treatment of a dislocated Ancha.
Know that a dislocation does not occur in the Ancha joint and the shoulder joint except for a dislocation: nor does what happens to the other joints from a small removal and concavity happen to them.
And indeed the Ancha joint is dislocated according to four parts. Which is because it dislocates anteriorly and posteriorly.
And indeed it most often dislocates medially: and rarely dislocates anteriorly and posteriorly.
And the treatment of its dislocation medially is: because when you join the leg of the healthy patient with the unhealthy one, it is longer; and their knee is more prominent than that of the healthy one, and they cannot bend their foot at their groin; and the place following the groin is swollen with a warm poultice, therefore, because the head of the femur has already reached there.
And the sign of the one who has a dislocation laterally is that they are the opposite accidents to these accidents.
And the sign of him to whom dislocation has happened to the front is that he extends the sound leg according to complement; however, he does not duplicate it without pain which is in the knee; and if he tries to walk, he cannot pass beyond that to the front; and his urine is retained, and his groin becomes abscessed, and at walking there is a pressing of his foot upon his heel.
And the sign of him to whom dislocation has happened to the back is that he does not extend his knee, nor can he double it before he doubles his groin; and his leg is also shorter than the other; and his groin is softened, and the head of the thigh bone is at the place of the ilium.
The reduction truly of these kinds of dislocations is that you consider then, if the dislocation is old, which already grows old with him having it. Then if you administer its reduction and it remains according to its own arrangement, then there is no cure at all in it. Therefore it is not fitting that a complete presumption be made upon him.
But in him whose dislocation is recent and is from one of the four kinds of dislocations then hurry to this so that you wish to join it and extend it inwards and outwards and move it right and left, perhaps indeed it returns and does not need other care.
But if it does not return in this way, then it is necessary that you prepare a strong attendant and he extends his leg from the lower part, either with his hands or with a bandage which is tied above his knee: and another attendant extends his hand from above so that he inserts his hands under his tibias. Then let him bind with a soft bandage above the root of the thigh and hold the extremity of the other bandage.
And let the extension of his be either from the front part of the groin to the part of the fork, or from the back to the part of the back.
And let the extension of them all be with one force, until the weak person is raised from the ground with his body, and remains hanging.
For this kind of extension is a common kind of the four kinds.
Therefore if the dislocation returns with what we said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary for every kind that which I say about its proper cure.
In the reduction indeed of it when the dislocation is inward, it is necessary that the weak person be laid on his sound side. Then let him place a bandage over the root of the thigh, in that which is between the head of the thigh and the place which is under the groin. Then extend the bandage upward from the groin to a higher part of the body, to the collarbone.
Then let another assistant take hold of his strong arms and reduce the thick place of the weak thigh, and extend it outward with a forceful extension. Now indeed it returns to its place.
And this kind is easier than the other kinds of cures by which this limb is reduced.
But if it escapes from you, and does not obey you to enter with this kind of cure altogether: then it is necessary that two feet of the weak person be tied together with a strong, soft bandage, over the two heels and over the two knees; and let the length of each be four finger-breadths from its companion; and let the weak leg be extended more than the other by the quantity of two finger-breadths.
Then let the weak person be suspended over the head of a beam which is in the house; and let the length of it from the ground be the quantity of two arm-spans.
Then direct a strong young man to brace the head of the thigh; and let another young man be suspended with the weak person; and let another young man push, bracing the thigh with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
In its reduction, however, when there is dislocation outwards, it is necessary that the patient lie on a bench, as we have described for one who has a hump. And let the ligature be tightened above his thigh, properly the weak one, and above his chest.
Then let two pieces of wood be placed, one at his feet and the other at his head. Then let a further piece of wood be placed in the middle of the bench, fixed well: on which wet cloths should be wrapped so as not to hurt the patient: and let the wood be between his thighs so that it is not pulled downwards during extension.
Then let every assistant extend to their part, and the doctor equalize the reduction with his hand.
If therefore it yields to reversion, it will be good.
And if not, place it upon the very board and press it equally as we said for a hump. However it is necessary that the patient lie on his sound side.
And when the dislocation is to the front, then it is necessary that the weak leg be extended quickly: and this is according to the same account on the bench: and let the doctor place the palm of his right hand upon the groin of the weak one. Then he should compress him with his other hand and with that compression place him extended downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is to the rear: then it is not necessary that the patient be extended downwards, and he should be raised above the ground: rather he should be placed upon a hard object, as it is necessary, as it also happens when his ankle dislocates outwards, according to what we said about his reclining position on two supports: and this is upon his face and with extended ligatures: as we said recently.
And it is necessary that compression be administered with a board also upon the place to which the joint travels, when reduction is completed as it should be.
And the sign of its return is not hidden from you; and it is, that you extend the two legs of the weak one; and when you see them equal, and the weak one draws up his leg, and expands it without excuse: then you will know that the limb has now returned, according to what is necessary: then join the two hips, and put on a plaster, and bind with an imemati, that is, a wheel; so that the ancha does not move to any part: and let the weak one adhere to quiet for three days, or four.
Then untie the ligature and the plaster, and compare the leg with the other; then if you see them equal in position, then you will know that the dislocation has now been fixed; therefore discharge the weak one to walking.
And if you see anything of softening; then return and plaster that, and bind it according to your first binding; and let it also remain for three days.
Then untie it and make him delay walking on both for several days until it is well strengthened.
Concerning dislocation of the knee.
The knee dislocates according to three modes. It dislocates outward, inward, and downward, that is, backward.
And it does not dislocate forward.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you command the weak one to apply his leg to his thigh. But if it does not adhere to the thigh: then you know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all modes of its dislocation is to make the weak one sit upright so that he now extends his leg if he can over it, and leans his back against your face; and place his foot between your feet.
Then make his knee adhere with your palms, and pass them straight between your fingers over his knee. Then apply with your hand the two sides of his knee with strength. And another attendant should extend his foot until the knee returns to its place.
And the sign of reduction is that the leg adheres to the hip with ease, not laboriously.
Then plaster it, and make the leg adhere to the hip. Then bind them together with a splint for three or four days. Then untie them.
And let the weak one not walk for several days until he is healed.
But if reduction is refused to you, then administer strong extension with bandages, of which the preceding account was given in the treatment of a sprain, until it returns.
On the treatment of dislocation of the heel.
The heel is sometimes moved by a small removal and sometimes dislocated according to its complement. And its dislocation occurs, either inward or outward.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the heel swollen, protruding to the side to which it is dislocated.
But the treatment of its removal is easy reduction: and it is that it be extended with ease with the hands, and equalized until it returns.
When treating it and it is dislocated according to its complement, you must make the weak person sit straight; and let a strong servant hold him firmly from behind at the middle of his back.
Then you take his foot with your right hand from its upper part and with your left hand from the lower part of his foot in the place of the heel.
Then draw the foot towards you with your right hand. Then push twice with your left hand.
Then extend with your left and press the chest of the foot with your right towards the leg without effort.
Do that twice as we have described.
Then press the chest of the foot towards the leg in the third turn and you draw the heel.
Therefore if it returns in one or two turns according to this method and you see the foot equalized, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation upon him for it will return.
But if its reduction is prevented from you with what we have described: then make the weak person lie on his back on the ground and fix a bolster firmly in the ground so that it falls between his thighs; and now wrap a cloth over him so as not to injure the weak person.
Then let a servant take hold of his thigh; afterwards let another servant extend the foot either with his hands or with a bandage which he ties above the ankle. Then let all the servants extend against the extension of their companions and let the bolster stand between the two thighs of the weak person holding him so that his body is not drawn downward during extension.
Then the doctor equalizes the dislocation with his hands and let another servant hold the sound leg downwards. For the dislocation returns with speed.
Therefore when the dislocation returns and its restoration of health is declared to you then apply a plaster and compress it firmly with bandages and tie the foot to the leg with a bandage.
And you must be careful or afraid of the nerves which are above the heel behind, so that a bandage is not tight over them and injure them.
Then let him go for two days, or three. And if the bandage is loosened, tighten it; then untie it on the third or fourth day; and forbid the weak person from walking for forty days. But if he tries to walk before that time, there is no safety lest the dislocation be undone over him and be corrupted and not receive healing afterward.
But if a hot abscess should happen to him: then it is necessary that you administer to him in the quieting of it that which our narration previously set forth in another place from its treatment, and an application, until it is removed.
Concerning the dislocation of the toes, and its treatment.
It is necessary that what is dislocated be made equal to those with a little extension without labor; and indeed this is not difficult, but rather easy.
But if the dislocation is in some knots of the back of the foot: then it is necessary that the weak person make his foot sit upon an equal place to the ground, or upon a board; and he stands thus as if walking.
Then you stand and put your foot upon that which protrudes from those joints. Then press that with your foot with strength, until it returns and you see it already equal, and there does not appear a prominence in its place.
Then put under the belly of his foot a board which takes the whole foot, to which are two heads. Then tighten it with a decent bandage for three days. Then untie it and make him rest from walking for many days until it is tightened and secured from reduction.
Concerning the kinds of dislocations with a wound or fracture.
When something of this kind occurs and you attempt its treatment and restoration, very often death follows; and therefore it is not necessary that one presume over the treatment of such a thing unless he is prudent in the art of long practice, merciful, pious, slow, neither bold nor presumptuous; and that he use in the beginning medicines which only subdue hot inflammations: and dismiss the sick to divine judgment. Unless you see or hope for salvation from destruction with the mildness of the illness and where something of hope appears. Therefore attempt its reduction immediately at the beginning of the matter, before a hot inflammation occurs.
If then the limb returns as we wish, then administer a regimen which subdues inflammations; and care for the wound with what suits it from drying ointments.
But if the dislocation is with a fracture and separate splinters occur in the bone, then attempt their removal and do in it what we said in simple illnesses from that which preceded in the places of them.
And be cautious according to your virtue and guard yourself from entering the way of fear according to what my previous preaching was to you.
For that is better for you with your Creator and more lasting for your glory and safer for your body among them in your time.
