O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, very dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine along with its fulfillment, and I have made an end through its expositions and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hand, namely, "surgery."
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of the hand is neglected in our region and considered foreign everywhere, the knowledge and skills have perished, and nothing remains except for brief descriptions found in books by the ancients that were handled by the hands.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are hidden and knowledge is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	I think it is necessary to vivify this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the instruments of cautery, and other tools of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of the hands are found in our time, the art of medicine has been neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And one who undertakes this must surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as far as he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and tendons, and the number of veins, and their movement and rest, and their places of origin.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And because Hypocrites says that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little; and likewise in the art of the hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, be careful that he does not slip into error and harm people; just as I have seen many of those who meddle in this science and then abandon it without knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish surgeon who lanced an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and he lanced the arteries in the neck; as a result, so much blood flowed out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in a man's testicle, and the stone was large; he took out part of the bladder with it, and the man died within three days.Et vis un autre qui copa une veine sur la tete d’un home qui aveit grant mal de caboche, et li veines fu si lances que li sangs s’en fu tout par; et le home fu mort en  .iiij. jors.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if they cut it out he would certainly die.Et vis un autre home qui aveit grant mal de caboche, et fu traitz la piere; et li sangs fu tant par la veine que li home morrut al instanz.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another patient who was treated by a duke of our land, who had broken his leg, and with the break, had a wound; and the ignorant doctors pressed the break on the wound with strong pressure, and did not leave any dressing on the wound, and left it with only a bandage; and they instructed him not to remove it. And he remained like that, with his leg, foot, and toe all swollen, until they were lost.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to attend to him, and I hurried to go and release the leg; and when I released it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But the corruption had already been confirmed in the limb, and I could not heal it; and the corruption continued to spread through the limb until the entire leg was lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another patient who had a wound that became infected, and then inflamed due to the maltreatment of his lord.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	Because when a ulcer is free from melancholy humor, it should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that one can completely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And because of this, dear son, it is necessary that you know that manual work is divided into two parts: that is, there are actions where there is danger in many situations; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Because of this, it is necessary for you to be careful, so that the foolish crowd cannot speak ill of you. Take up your weapons in the cause of God, and undertake your duties lightly and firmly, and use the best method so that by the grace of God you may achieve salvation and be praised; leave behind terrible illnesses of sorrow, and rid yourselves of what makes you doubtful, and have faith in yourselves so that you may pass from this world to one of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in one of his warnings: "Do not take on a serious illness unless you are called a foolish crowd.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have arranged this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is on fire cauteries and medicinal cauteries, and it covers the head to the feet. It also includes information on the instruments of cauteries, their preparation, and all that is necessary for the procedure.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is on cutting and piercing, leeches, wounds, arrow extractions, and similar procedures. It also includes information on the instruments used in these procedures.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and扭伤s, and similar things; and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus, as we remember the work, it is fitting that I describe the nature of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the most lengthy speech and subtle knowledge and the secret responses; and the majority of the wise spoke about this, and agreed upon it; and I am satisfied with their words, for I desire brevity.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery aids universally in every complexion where there is matter, whether it be the .ij. complexions: namely, the hot complexion without matter, and the dry complexion without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	Those of hot and dry complexions together with matter, some people said that cautery is of great aid; and others said the contrary: that cautery is not useful for diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured by heat nor dryness; and those who said the contrary, that cautery helps greatly in hot and dry diseases that arise in the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the complex nature of fire, you find the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	Because I have found this to be true through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And yet, do not worry about this except for those who have experienced it and know through long usage the treatment with cauteries, and the diversity of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and their recoveries and the timing; we have no fear of the other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the myrrh was similar and agreed with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that fire cautery combines heat and is of greater goodness than burning cautery of medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	Because fire is simple and does not harm any part other than the cooked member, and does no harm to any other part if one does not touch it.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fires travel from one part of the body to another, causing disease in the process, and sometimes they cure the illness due to the heat and goodness of their nature; but often they cause harm if there is an excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found by experiment and by the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and been under the truth of things; and because of this I excuse myself from the length of speech, for it does not please me to take away from you the secret that is contained in fire, and the quality of the work, how it heals illnesses of the body, as the philosopher explains in his demonstration; now receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed upon what time cauteries should be performed, and chose an auspicious moment.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the harmfulness that arises from it is lessened by the aid of cautery; and especially if the cautery is for necessary, severe pain that cannot wait until a more convenient time.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear son, as the foolish people do; for there is no recurrence of the disease that is healed by cautery; and they say it is so, but it is not true, for cauteries are not like medicine that moves the complexion, and dries up the humors that cause pain, and is better than medicine for its swiftness and power, and for the virtue of its work and majesty.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease may come again according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its power; and there are gathered in it the excesses caused by the digestion of foods and similar things, unless cautery is administered where there is little excess and moisture, as with tooth cauteries for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but that rarely happens.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine; but it is true: they do not believe that cautery works after medicine has failed, but their intentions are false, and cautery is the last resort of medicine because when we administer treatments for any illness and they do not work, then we administer cautery, and it is effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is clear that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauterization with a golden instrument is milder than with iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and its high value; and they said that cautery does not cause swelling, but this is not true, as I have experienced and found in some people; and cautery with gold is more effective than with iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	However, when you heat the golden instrument, you cannot tell when it is hot by its color, and it cools down immediately; and if it is heated too much, it is heated in the fire; and so there are many disadvantages.Et quant tu chaufes estrument de fer si le conais par la color et si durent adont plus longuement, et s’il n’est pas trop chaud il ne fait mie porriture.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this we use fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Here I have arranged this chapter from head to foot, so that the way is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of olive-oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and coldness on the brain, and there are two types caused by a disease called "soda", and by many humors which flow from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and for numerous ailments such as dreaming, toothache, and throat pain, and especially for all diseases arising from coldness, like paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged with a cleansing, dissolving medicine for 3 or 4 days, depending on what the strength, age, and condition of the patient can endure; and then have the head of the patient shaved.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then have him sit cross-legged in your lap, and place his hands on his thighs; after that, place the palm of your hand between the roots of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two middle fingers meet, there will be bleeding, then heat up the cautery which is called 'olive-stone', and this is how it is formed:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the marked spot with ink, and move your hand up and down while pressing gently; then lift your hand gently and check the bone again to see if it is broken; and if you don't see it, repeat the cautery until you do as I have instructed; then take a little salt and put it in awe and soft cotton, and apply it to the spot, and let it stay for 3 days; then apply moistened cotton in butter; and leave it until the burn is healed; then treat the wound with the ointment called 'tetrafarmacon' until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients say that when a wound stays open longer, it purges more; and for this reason, they advise using leeches.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some say that one should leave the cautery for so long that part of the bone is burned, and then what has been burned in the bone is healed over, and then it is cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one should hold the cautery above and press so hard that one lowers the bone as much as a thumb width, as the women put their thimbles in their fingers to let the humors issue out; then the wound must be left open for a long time; after that it must be cured and bound.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cautery do not seem good to me in every way, except in some people where there is fear; and I think that I should leave it, for the shoulder is weakened by continued solutions of nature, as we testify in other members; and likewise when the shoulder of the sick person is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more safe and mild for me, so I work together salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When chronic pain affects the whole head and lasts a long time, one should use herbs and pills that are called 'cochie', as well as purges for the head, oils, and plasters; and if they undergo the cautery we mentioned earlier and it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the sick person is not of a cold nature and is not too cold; then cauterize it with the fire cautery we mentioned earlier for just a little while.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	Afterward, cauterize each horn of the head up to the bone as we said before, and do one cautery in the area called 'vasselz'; there is a place for placing leeches; and lighten your hand so that you do not reach the bone: the patient feels much more pain from this cautery than the others, and I will speak of it later; and the cauteries on the horns should be thinner than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and here is the method:
dou cautere dou chief	of the cautery for the head:
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain arises in the head and the disease extends to the eye, and the shoulder is purged with purifying medicines, and all other remedies I have described under the division of diseases have been applied without success: then cauterize according to two methods, that is, with hot water and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery of hot water: take a clove of garlic and remove the outer skin; then crush it into two pieces, and apply it to the affected area where the pain resides in such a way that you can place the clove of garlic underneath the skin; and when it is placed, bind it tightly and leave it for twelve hours; then loosen it and draw it away from the garlic clove, leaving the wound open for two or three days. Then apply a bandage soaked in butter until healing occurs.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the wound has healed, if you see any growths, use one of the burning remedies I have described in the twelfth chapter on burning remedies.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The cautery of iron is performed in the following manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery tool until it is hot.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "cauterization" because the top is made in the form of a lid where there is .i. little curve, and in the middle has a small appearance; and place it on the painful area, and hold your hand and turn it slightly so that half of the thickness of the heart is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery does not glow, which is hot, and abundant blood flows.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After putting cotton in the wound, and placing it for 3 days; then put wet cotton in butter, and then treat the area with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this vein with the cautery called "cultellare", on all its points, and be careful not to cover the artery in this vein which is not old.
de emigraine	of vein
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you cure veins as we have previously discussed in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cauteries previously mentioned in medicine and fire do not help him, then you should heat the cautery called  "cultellare" until it is white; and sign the painful area with a line of about half a finger's length, and lift your hand once, and stretch it so that you do not cover the artery and so that spasm does not come to illness, and be careful of the mandible so that it does not move when one chews, and let the nerves have no regard for the mute and that spasms do not come to illness, and be careful of bleeding from the artery when it is covered, as covering has great fear and especially for those who are unaware and inexperienced; and leave the wound in mid-way; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery is covered, and I will show you where it opens in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him all over the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery which we have described in the chapter on the extraction of an artery, with a cautery that has two knives; and this cautery is better than that one and more effective.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of ear pain due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is ear pain from cold, and one has applied dissolving medicines and other remedies that we have described in the division, and the pain does not go away, then heat this cautery, which is called a "point", of which here is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After point around the entire ear of the affected side, or around both if the pain is in both ears, and then move slightly up from the root of the ear after you have marked the area to be treated; and have 10 points around each ear; after treating the area until it heals.
de la torture de la bouche	of the mouth's torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	There is no cautery for the ulcers that come from flowing blood, as we have said in the sections on diseases; and do not apply cautery to appearances that come from dryness and nerve-spasms.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this appearance of torture that comes from blood flowing from the head and purging, and from gargling, if it does not help, then you must cauterize the patient with .iij. cauteries: one in the root of the ear, and another a little beyond the temple, and the third in the junction of the two lips; and apply the cautery to the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery in the shape of a key, burning it halfway down the ear, and another cautery in the temple as long as a thumb; and leave the cautery on until half of the head is burned.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the shape of the key is as we have described before, but it should be a little more slender, and the knife a little thicker; then treat the area as I have described before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it thus as we have said, yet does not benefit, and the patient has fever, then make 4 cauteries: 2 on the 2 horns of the head, 1 in the middle of the head, and 1 on the place which is called 'vassels', as we said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and let it be treated as we have said before.
de litargie	of litharge
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient large pilules that cleanse the brain; then shave the head of the patient all over, and put on the occlusion of mustard which is written in the treatise on occlusions; and here is how to do the cautery: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is healed thus, it is good; and if he is not, make him 3 cauteries in the middle of the head going down to the neck, with a space of 2 fingers between each cautery; and cure him as the others, and if you see fit to adjust it, and the patient can bear it, make 1 cautery in the middle; and if need be, 2 more on the 2 horns, and cure him as before. And let it be the cautery which is called 'olive', as I said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of coldness from the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to cleanse the head of hairs and of that which we have previously mentioned; after washing the head of the patient, then make cauterization within the head and upon each temple, and one behind and three upon the spine of the neck; and if you have greater need, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is severe, then make four cauterizations upon the spine of the back; and let it be until the heart's most heat is burned, and lift your hand; after cure it until it is healed, and let the cautery be that which is called "olive oil" which we have previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and first the brain must be cleansed of hairs and other cures that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is great and suffering from taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot bear it, make him gargle and chew, purifying the brain often with good meat; after that, the king the head in the middle, and do to him .a cautery according to what we have said before, and .a cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the disease is strong and painful, make cauteries as I have said for one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be of olive according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the disease is in children, make a subtle cautery according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When through the cause of melancholy there are corrupt humours and thick phlegm, then cauterize with mild cauteries as we have said for one who has paralysis.Et se li malaides est en la teste, se li fai cauteres de bille de verre selonc la maniere que j’ai dit; et s’il ne peut endurer le cautere de feu, se li fai cautere froid com nos avons dit a celui qui ait mal en la teste.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if through the cause of melancholy the humours are inclined to melancholy, and the body of the sick person is moist, then give him something to drink which will purify the brain, according to what is said before in the division.And if through the cause of melancholy the humours are declining into melancholy, and the body of the sick person is moist, then give him something to drink which will purify the brain, according to what is said before in the division.Et s’il est li cors dou malaide sec, adonques li fai boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mondifiez et li corps aussi, selonc ce qu’il est dit a celui qui ait mal en la teste.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After releasing the head of the ill person, make a well-made linen bandage in the shape of a circle and place it around the head; have the patient cross their arms and hold them tightly from all sides; then apply the liniment, using mutton fat from an old sheep; gently heat it to a temperature that the patient can bear; then remove the bandage from inside the head and let it cool; do this for the ill person once a week until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or, if you wish to cauterize him, make several points on the cautery tool.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cauterization softens the brain significantly; then, place wet cotton in whale oil and beef tallow on it.
de l’awe des eulz	of their eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When awe first comes to the eyes through the signs that I have described in the division, then begin and give the patient drinking things that cleanse the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make him sweat in a bath several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he commands the patient to turn his head and cauterize the scalp, and make 2 cauteries on both temples if both sides are affected, or one if only one side is; and cut all the veins and arteries under the heart, and make the cauteries long according to the width of the temple; and be wary of bloodletting, and if you see too much blood emerging, stop it with as much power as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and the incision, the cauterization method; and sometimes cauteries or incisions are made under the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	where tears fall
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When tears are old and habitual, and are on the veins or arteries that are visible on the outside of the head; and one sees that this is from cold phlegmatic superfluities, then he should be cauterized as I have said earlier regarding the temples: 1 cautery in the scalp, 2 cauteries on both temples, and 2 cauteries or incisions under the two bones; and if more is needed, then cauterize bleeding above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	where the body weeps within them
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat him according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three nights of leeches; after that, bleed the head, and make him a cautery with olive oil in the middle of the cautery; and make two cauteries with the cautery called "clavilis" on the two sores, one just under the hair; and be careful of the artery so that you do not cut it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery tool, which is called 'olive'.Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste maniere: chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme.
de coi ci est li forme:	is formed in the following manner; heat the cautery tool until it is hot and shaped as desired.Or, if you wish to cauterize him, make several points on the cautery tool.This method of cauterization softens the brain significantly; then, place wet cotton in whale oil and beef tallow on it.When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery tool, which is called  'olive'.
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see fit to do so, make two cauteries on the two warts as long as the warts are; and don't take your hand away until a third of the paper has burned, according to the manner I have described.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes the hairs of the eyes are turned backwards and prick the eye; and cauteries are made according to two methods: one is with fire, and the other is with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a warm bath; then draw on paper over their eyes a figure that is like a myrtle leaf, with the beginning of the sign in between the hairs; then moisten cotton with egg white and parsley juice over the eye, then heat the cautery so that it takes the shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterize on the figure you have drawn a little bit many times, so that the heat is burned in the place; and the sign of the health of the eye is that you see the paper retire, and the hairs rise at the edge of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus. For three days, then moisten cotton with butter until the scald is healed; after cure with ointment until it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs grow, and the paper softens, then restart the cautery in the same place, just as you did before; and if the hair is lost, then cauterize until the paper returns to its natural place, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and live charcoal, of each one part, and grind them together well; and do this quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it on the shape that you have made like the myrtle leaf, and put it under the eyes; and if the disease is in one eye only, then work in one, and if in both, then also; and moisten cotton with egg white under the eye; and let the patient's hand be in warm water, and press a little and release repeatedly whenever the patient feels burning from the medicine, because it burns just like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine with your right hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the bite has healed, lift up the eyelid and check if the paper is raised just as it was by the constraint of fire or by incision; if so, it is good.Et s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, then apply medicine to the area again until your work is equalized and the eyes are set right; then place wet cotton on the burnt skin until the wound heals, and then treat the area with ointment called "diafenes" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to be careful with your work so that the medicine does not get in the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft after, and the hair prick in the eye, then repeat the medicine on the area that is softened properly, just as you did before; then treat it until it is healed; and this is the form of the mule's testicle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this, your constraints should be; and do not rely on the right way for those who study this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	on the treatment of fistulas with cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you are treating a fistula as we have described in the division of diseases, and your treatments are not helping, then you should use cautery according to the following method:
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head on your lap, and hold his head steady between your hands so that he does not move or lower his head. Then moisten cotton with egg white or parsley juice and apply it to the fistula. Next, heat the cautery, which should be shaped like a tent, with one point at each end, although a flat cautery is also suitable for your purpose.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Then press on the fistula if it is open and clean it out, drying it thoroughly. If it is closed, open it and draw out any pus. Next, apply the hot cautery directly to the wound, holding your hand on the cautery near the area beneath the eye, taking care not to cause any damage. Apply the cautery to the fat around the eye and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery to the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then repeat the cautery once more, and again if you need to, and let it be for three days; then put on wet cotton in butter, and treat it with a drying ointment until it is healed; and if 40 days pass and it is not healed, then apply a corrosive medicine so that the bone is exposed; and the king will act according to what he experiences in his kingdom.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of performing a cautery on a fistula, which some of the ancients mentioned:
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Examine the fistula and poke it with a needle; then insert into the opening a very thin piece of cotton that has been treated with the medicine:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make the amount of a 3-day-old clump; and hold your hand on the camahan firmly, and do not move the patient at all, so that the molten lead does not leak into his eye; and one must place moist cotton in the patient's eye, soaked in olive oil or in awe: the lead will fill the fistula, and heal miraculously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we have described, that is good.Et se li fistule ne fu saniee, si met la mesme medicine sus la fistule qu’eli est, et tantor que li fistule ne fu sanee, si le met sus li fistule; et li fistule sera saniee adonques, ou li membra sera mort.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then one must administer an incision to the nail, and bring the fistula back into the body of the finger according to what is appropriate in its own place.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cracks occur in the lips that are called "hairs," especially in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have described in the sections above, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small scalpel according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put it gently into the cracks until it reaches the bottom; after that, dress the wound with ointment until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess forms in the root of the throat, or uvula, or palate, or tooth roots, and it causes swelling and pus, and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said for fistulas, and it does not heal: then you must use a cautery according to the size of the fistula; after cleansing the opening of the fistula, hold your hand so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and from behind; and do this once or twice, after treating what we have said in treatments, until it is healed; and if it is healed like this, that is good; and if not, then you must expose the area and remove the rotten bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it doesn't work, then put the head of the patient in your lap; after heat the cautery which will be described below in such a way that you place a candle on the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside until the patient feels the heat going to the root of the tooth; after lifting your hand, reheat the cautery according to your desire; after fill the patient's mouth with warm salt water, and let it sit for an hour and spit it out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way, a tooth that was loose is made firm, and the gums are softened and restrained, and corrupted moisture is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of dental pain
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When dental pain comes from coldness, or there is coldness or whiteness, and medical remedies are ineffective, then cauterization in two ways is needed: cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization with butter: take butter from cow's milk and the tip in an iron or brass spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, moisten it in the butter, and hold it on the painful tooth until it cools down; do this repeatedly until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. If you see the cotton and butter becoming cold, heat the iron again so that the fire reaches the gum of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The fire cautery: take a rod of iron or bronze, as thick as the wound allows, so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient. After heating the cautery, whose shape will come out afterwards, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools; do this frequently, for the pain will be relieved that day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And the patient must fill his mouth with good butter immediately after this cautery, and then rinse it out; and here is the shape of the cautery tool:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery of any tooth you want, according to what you can afford; and this is the shape of the rod:
des scrophules	of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula is caused by cold moisture and is stubborn to digestion through medicines, then heat the cautery, so that afterwards the shape of it comes out, and have two openings for the smoke to exit from one end of the cautery tool to the other; place the heated cautery on the abscess once, or as many times as needed, going to the depth of the abscess. If the abscess is small, use a cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it in place for three days; then apply cotton soaked in butter until the burns are healed. Afterwards, dress the wound with ointments and bandages until it is completely cured.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture prevails over the channels of the lung, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient should first be purged with soluble medicines; then make cautery at the root of the throat, and beware that you do not go up to the throat, but burn only a little way down.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then make another cautery at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and let the cautery be called 'clavicle', as we have described its form above; and heal the area as we have said before until it is healed.Si li malaides de la cainne est par cause de moiture, adonc covient que li fasse cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee et s’il ne peut demorer en son leu; si covient il que tu remettes li cauteres a la racine dou pormon si com nos avons dit.
de la toust	of the tongue
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all diseases of the stomach are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is chronic, then make two cauteries on the sternum in open wounds; and another cautery between the breasts, halfway between the nipples; using the cautery called 'clavicle' as described earlier.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, do cauterize all the way to the point of cautery, which is called a "point," whose form is as mentioned above in the disease of the ears; and let the points go to thirty, or all around.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	Afterwards cure the site according to what has been mentioned before, and let there be three cauteries according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for this reason cauteries are more effective when you do them three times.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterward, soak the patient's back and side in warm water; then gently press the liver which is inside the breastbone with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, apply the cautery which has two fingers of lead in this place where there are .ij. nerves:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the heart until it penetrates to the chest, and the figure of the cautery will come together with four cauteries; and this is why a cautery is made with the cautery that has three nerves, so that the figures of cauterization are six cauteries; and the nerve according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the shape of the cautery which has three nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is placed on this one nerve, so that there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Afterwards, put crushed herbs on the cautery; then let the patient rest and not move the limb for a long time until he is well healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, very little happens, therefore, do cauterize on the thick part of the cautery called a "clavicle," or with many cauteries in points.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture occur in the stomach to such an extent that it strains his complexion, and he experiences many cataracts, and the usual methods of treatment do not help, then you must have the patient lie on his back, with his legs and arms stretched out.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From this then below the heel of the foot by the amount of a finger, make three cauteries one across the collar bone, and two cauteries from either side so that the shape of the cauteries is at three angles, and there is space between each so they are not joined when they bend for pus; and the cauteries should be so deep that they pierce both parts of the heart, and the shape of the cauteries according to this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery inside the stomach according to this form, and one who fears this cautery: cauterize by pricking and marking on the stomach at one point according to the amount you desire to cauterize; then cauterize throughout with the cautery called "points.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the healing of the wound we mentioned before, until it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver is painful due to cold and moisture and strong winds, as it has been driven out of its natural complexion by excesses; and the patient is treated with what we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit him, then the patient should be placed on his back; and perform III cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, avoiding the hypochondria, where the ribs of man come; and there should be the thickness of a thumb between each cautery; and the cauteries should be long on the body, and do not press your hand hard on all the cauteries; and only half of the heart should be burnt, and the patient should lie straight on his back; and if he cannot, then let him lie down, and stretch his legs, and lift his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	If you wish, cauterize these cauteries with a knife, if you are skilled and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn the whole chest, for you would dry out the whole body; and do not let it come to boiling, for the chest is a very delicate place, and you can tell by looking.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, then the patient does not feel pain too strongly; but if it is in the membrane, then they feel violent pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then when this treatment has removed the pus, the patient should be propped up with his head raised; and then sign the spot where the abscess was with the sign of the cross, and then heat the cautery which is similar to a reed, from which comes the form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize with the cautery until the skin is burned, and goes down to the subcutaneous tissue, until the pus is all drained; then after the wound has healed according to the healing of wounds, until it is cured; and one should not use this cautery except those who have studied long in the art of medicine, and by whom these diseases have sometimes been corrupted.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore he can operate boldly, but nevertheless it seems to me that it is better to let it be.
dou cautere de pleuresin	from the cautery of phlegm
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should do cauteries of phlegm with roots of aristolochia, and in such a way: take a long root of aristolochia, as large and as long as your fingers; moisten it in oil, and heat it on fire, and cauterize with 1 cautery between the throat and the collarbone, and 2 small cauteries a little lower down on the part which is under the beard; and 2 cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining slightly behind; and 1 cautery in the groin, and 1 other over the stomach, and 1 between the 2 shoulders, and 2 at the 2 sides of the groin opposite to the cautery which is between the 2 shoulders; and do not press your hand, but do it gently as if applying a perfume.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And some ancient authors said that some men used a cautery made like a razor, and heated it and placed it between the ribs, until it reached that abscess; and if pus did not flow out with the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this operation there is fear or death to the patient, or a fistula occurs which cannot be cured.Et si avient que li sang ne veult pas fuier, il est bon que tu t’esvaiges le cautere et tu remues li costes tant qu’il fuie, car li fuers apaisera li dolor.
de la mice	And the most common are from the stomach and the ribs as we have said, and it is necessary that the patient lies in bed, because the rising of the cauteries is great in this work; and if he cannot stay in bed, let him be seated on a chair of straw, or a wooden chair, or a throne, and let the cauteries be lifted from where he was seated.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not help, then there are three ways to cauterize which are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	One method is to make three or four cauteries along the length of the mole, according to its shape, as we have described before; do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient lie on his back; another way is to heat the cautery with two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; lift the skin where the mole or wart is located, towards the left side, and let the elevation by which you lift the skin follow the natural curve of the body, and the cautery should follow the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	Afterward, insert the two heated nerves until they pierce the skin on the other side; then pull the cautery away, and in this way, there will be four of them. If you see fit, cauterize the entire mole with three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the sore has healed for a long time, it is as good as any of the other sores mentioned above.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery is not useful for hydrophobia, except in the manner which is called "asclytes.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your treatment is ineffective, then you must perform IIII cauteries around the armpit, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the groin, and two on the back on the spine, and one on the buttock; and the cauteries should be close to the rib cage.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	Afterward, leave the cautery open to drain pus for a long time, and do not stop treating the patient after the cautery; healing will hasten, and the two intentions will come together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly should be a spear, as we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is shown there.
de l’enfleure des piez	of swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in hydrophobia, and they are filled with yellow water, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; and move your hand with the cautery without turning.Quant li piez son enflez e plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire ; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, thus one will close against the yellow awl, and let the cautery be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After that, make 2 cauteries on each leg, one below the knee in front and the other above, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries for a long time without cleaning, until the water comes out; then clean it as with the other cures we have described.
de la menoison	of menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When a stomachache comes from cold and moisture, so that the retaining and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are impaired, and cannot be cured by means of treatments; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with much strength, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what was spoken of before regarding the cautery of the stomach, and also a circumferential cautery; and four cauteries around the abdomen with a fine cautery-iron, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, make cauteries on the elbow, and one cautery on each joint, and two small cauteries upon the stomach apart from the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good support.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are in the anus, one or more, and are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and are treated as we have described in the sections on division, and it does not help, then do cautery: III on the spine of the back, that which is completely outside below the anus, poke and poke in a triangle shape, and do cautery underneath the buttock II times; and if you think that the stomach is cool, and the food is not digesting, and one sees swelling of the face, then do one large cautery on the stomach, as described before, and one on the liver, and one on the mouse, all with a long cautery; and let the cautery remain open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After curing the area until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut the thelul, use a cautery that looks like  .i razor, and then put it all ablaze on the cut thelul; and hold your hand so that the cauteries reach the base of the vein, from which the blood flows; do this once or .ij., and if there is a lot of thelul, cauterize each one as we have said. After curing with healing ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on alchatim, it will provide more relief.
de plaie mal curee	of poorly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot undergo surgery or opening, which we will discuss in its place, then there comes such a disease that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a person has an abscess, and it is suppurating and oozing rotten moisture, then you should test it with a thin needle, and be careful that you know the depth of the needle.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	Then heat the cautery that looks like a razor, and insert it into the abscess according to the depth of the needle, and repeat the cautery until the pus and corruption are burnt, once or twice or three times, depending on the amount needed; and beware of burning any nerves that are nearby, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	if the abscess goes towards the bladder and intestines, then beware of those areas, and do not apply heat to fatty tissue, and believe that it is not perishable; after curing the area until it is healed, and if the area is swollen and the matter is discharged for a long time, then know that the area is completely healed; and if the matter is not discharged, know that the area is punctured and the bone at the bottom is rotten; and thus, as we will say in its place.Apres que li fistule est sanez, si li leus est troez, et la matiere ne se poie ostre, adonc covient il que tu remettes le cautere a tot selonc l’anciennete de li fistule; et s’il est recente, si le boutonne, et le leu est sanez, adonc mets li cautere tant qu’ele brule; et s’il ne brule mie, adonc covient il que tu fasses l’un de ces deux fuers: ou que tu prene li corps de la bete, ou que tu le brules a la vige.
de la maladie des reins	of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When cold pain comes to the kidneys, and there are strong winds, and it does not take effect on a woman, then you should use cautery on both sides of the kidneys with the hot-iron cautery that we mentioned earlier. And if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will provide greater relief.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, and the patient retains urine, then he should be cauterized in the area above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic hair begin, one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery should be as long as a fingernail; and he should be cauterized one or two times on the back if necessary; and the cauteries should be curved according to the previously described shape.
de la marris	of the mare
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the mare is cold and moist, and does not conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms are delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: therefore, one should make three cauteries around the udder, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries on the back; and the cauteries should be curved, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moistors descend to the socket of the hip joint and displace it due to this cause, the sign is that the affected leg appears longer when measured alongside the other; and one finds the site of the displacement soft, so you must cauterize the disease upon the socket of the hip with a .i. cautery resembling a circle, and mark around the socket as it turns, so that the socket remains within the circle; and the cautery should be like those used for cauterizing the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not available to you, make .iij large cauteries from the olive-oil lamp, and let the cautery be as deep as all the others; and dress it until it heals.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the hip pain
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip joint, it is from cold and moisture, and the disease is cured by what we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the disease of gross humors with stinking pills, or other good-smelling pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After this he is cauterized; and the manner of cautery is in two ways: that is to say, together with burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is done in many ways, of which one is as follows: you cauterize on the hip bone three triangular cauteries according to this shape, and make them deep and large, and between each cautery there should be a space the thickness of a thumb, and the cauteries should be olive-shaped; sometimes a cautery is made in the middle of the hip, so that there are four according to this shape:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you wish, he is cauterized with the cautery of the circle which we have previously said about the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circles contain all the hip, and all the thickness of the heart is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the manner in which one does it for sciatica when the pain stays in the hip and does not go up to the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if the pain extends to the toe or near there, he is cauterized where he feels the pain with three or four points of the cautery called "points". And the cautery should be blade-like, and the thickness of the skin should be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to one or both feet, he is cauterized there with three or four points at the cautery called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if necessary, do more; and if he feels the pain below the knee towards the thigh, have him cauterized with a blade or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauteries that you don't leave the cautery on so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you don't cause the patient greater harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen several who had cautery applied to the ankle of the foot, and they left it until the leg was completely swollen, and the foot as well, and it was pierced and corrupted throughout the foot.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a stomach ache from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, cauterize one and then the other, following this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise men said about the cautery of the hip, whose manner is as follows, make an iron that is at the end as thick as a walnut, or slightly less, and it should be hollowed out in between so that there is the space of a thumb joint between them; and they should have teeth on both ends, and they should also be like teeth, and there should be a good quality handle of iron; and this is the shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is all red and glowing, then apply it to the hip joint of the patient, and turn it onto the healthy side; and cauterize once with one cautery rod and leave it for three days; then make a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the application of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use this cautery sparingly because of its fearsome reputation, and few people dare to use it; yet it is one of the best cauteries for those who can endure it, wherever it is applied.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cauteries of medicine burn if you make the instrument to interlock in such a way that the edge of the door descends, and it is made of brass or iron with one side long, and in its thickness has two nuts, and between each has the thickness of a thumb; and they are open underneath and on top, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After place the box of the hip on the patient lying on his healthy side, and press your hand firmly on the box of the hip; after pour between the two circles of the hot iron which is heated in the fire for a little while, and leave it for an hour, and let the patient bear the heat and burning.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it causes biting like fire; and when the biting is over, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip gently, and leave it thus for three days, and apply butter until what is black from the scald is removed; and leave it for three days so that pus drains out; and this would be the final aid after the treatment of poultices as long as he is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, make the instrument that colors with salt according to what you have done in the hip joint; and that is the way of the hot dye, and I wrote it in the treatise on the rectification of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, as much of each, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	It should have a small hole so that the point of a pin can enter; and place on this pot another well-plugged pot, and put on top of the alkali and chalk a soft dye, as much as you have pre-wetted with your hand; and leave it thus until it draws off water and pieces into the plugged pot, then take all that dye, and pour it over the chalk and alkali again as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then it will be very painful and is treated with various remedies of medicine and with cauteries of other members. For it does great harm like fire, and also with other medicines one cauterizes the hip thus: thistledown and honey and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen relates a remedy by which a man was cured of sciatica and a hernia, and he praises it highly, saying that nothing else was done to him, and that he was healed in one go after this treatment, and that he was then able to bathe as he instructed below:
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he describes how one should apply litargyre in this way: take it green and dry, and grind it with a small amount of fat, and place it on the hip, thigh, and leg where the pain is located, and then bandage it; leave it for three hours, and remove it when the pain no longer feels sore.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then let him enter the bath until his body is somewhat warmed, and let him enter the bed, and the pain will leave completely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such medicine after an evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's dung, it helps a lot; and the cautery must be done in this way:
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take lamb's wool and grease it with old oil, and place it on the hollow between the big toe of the foot and the one next to it, which is called the 'foscile'.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Then take dry goat's dung and place it in the fire until it becomes charcoal, and place it on the lamb's wool, and leave it there until it turns white; do this again, and keep doing so until you feel that it has reached up to the hip and the pain is gone. This method of cauterization is called 'the goat cautery'.
de la dolor dou dos	of back pain
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When back pain comes from sitting or impact or from excessive evacuation, or from similar appearances of cold matter, in none of these appearances is cautery worthwhile except for that which comes from the diffusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is appropriate that after the patient is relieved of foul-smelling pills or other similar remedies, one should apply a line on their back, where the pain is located, three times marked with incense, and in each line .v. cauteries or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cautery should be performed according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you wish, perform .iij. cauteries or .iiij. using the middle-sized cautery tool according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this illness comes to young children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a tight and painful neck when they wake up, and fear; and you will find it in the last spine of the back, and in us the appearance that comes on the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you see it being cured, then cauterize it with a cautery needle according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery purifies every part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery tool 2 or 3 lines apart, and have the points close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	Afterwards, dress the wound until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware of applying a cautery tool to a ulcerated place that is in the webbing between nerves.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain in joints is due to moistors that are expanded throughout each member of the body, and when the pain comes from the feet, which they properly call "podagra", and when it is caused by cold and cannot be cured by medicines, then it is cured by cautery in such a way: make the mouth of the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive oil according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is a need to apply the tool on the bottom of the foot, use the entire cautery tool with the point.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, cauterize each knee with 3 or 4 cauteries of each part, using the entire olive-shaped cautery tool; and if you need more, do more, but do not hold your hand in one place longer than the thickness of the skin is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and back, then administer the cautery that we have described in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, then poke around the wrist for two lines; and if there is no more pain in the arms, then poke on each joint and on the back of the hand; and if the pains come to the armpits or shoulders, cauterize each part, and exercise good control over the patient and take medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you exercise good control over him and cleanse the blood, he will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rupture of the sinus
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When gangrene comes in the feet and the bowels descend into the groin and this is new, then when you see it being cured, he should not eat that day. He should use things that loosen the belly so that the feces exit his belly; after that make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath until the bowels are relaxed, and bring them back to your fingers, and sign with ink under the gangrene on the bone of the wrist, and all over a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body; then heat up the cautery of which this is the shape:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it becomes white and oozes pus.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bones to their place; and have the patient hold his hand out so that they do not return; and work the thighs for the patient, and put a pillow and a servant under the thighs, and another under the foot which holds the hand; then apply the cautery to the sign all over your hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, do it again until you reach the bone; and be careful that the blister does not burst when you are doing the cautery so that you do not burn him; and so that through this the patient does not die or become ill.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And you should know that when you do not come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And the cautery for children should be subtle according to the size of their ears, and for adults it should be as large according to their size; after three days, treat the site of the cautery with butter until the scald is healed; then treat it with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days so that the wound is well sewn up; and one must let his hair grow long enough, so that when he wants to go inside, the hairs do not stick out.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wants to get up, if a well-made bandage is provided for him and worn for another forty days, and he has good rest, not too much activity, and he guards against too much eating and drinking and laughing loudly; then if he follows these instructions, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say after this about the treatment of cutting in his shoulder.
de la routure dou ventre	of diarrhoea
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ulcers come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they are not growing anymore, then do cauterization with the fire cautery according to its quantity, and burn the third of the skin; after the treatment according to what we have said; and some of the ancients have said that one should cauterize it with a three-angled cautery according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first sign the entrance and draw a line across the width above the ulcer, and one down, and hold your hand in between throughout the cauterization.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and gentler.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in a limb, whether from falling or being struck, and the pain lasts a long time, and medical treatment does not help, then it should be cauterized with the cautery called "pointed", and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb, its smallness and weakness, and its torture and location of pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	if it is healed from the first cautery, that is good; if not, do another cautery on it, for such is the custom that it should move in the member to which it is close, so you must make the cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	from mixing
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	Nails are sometimes helped by cautery with great care, especially the disease that comes from putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	When you see it being cauterized, take care if the disease is in its early stages, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not become worse or persist, and you doubt that the corruption might spread throughout the disease, then do five cauteries on the head: one in the middle of the head, and one towards the forehead at the end of the hairline; and two on the two corners, and one behind on the nape of the neck; and hold your hand so that the cautery reaches the bone, and so that the vapor from the gross humors can escape; and cauterize the mouse according to what is before it.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the wound is everywhere scattered; and it is bleeding obviously, then you must cauterize it with these cauteries that we have said in the head, and .1. cautery in the nose, and .2. cauteries on the spine of the neck, and .6. cauteries on the spine of the back, and .1. large one on the groin and .1. other nearby, and .2. on the .2. shoulders; and .2. on the armpits, and .2. on the tendons of the feet, and .1. on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the creases of the hands; and be careful of the nerves that are on the back of the heel, so that you do not burn them; and sometimes make .1. cautery on the bone of the wrist, and .1. other on the bone of the stomach, and .1. other on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more you do cautery, the more it helps and moves him; and know that the sick person does not feel any pain from cautery as a healthy person would, because the body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	Afterward, treat the area with wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes to a member and is treated with remedies, oils, and poultices, but it is not healed, then do cautery on the member according to its size; let the cautery be somewhat penetrating into the depth of the joint; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes cautery is done on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the member, and in this way the swelling is removed; but nevertheless no one should practice it unless they are knowledgeable about the members and the exits of the nerves that move the body.
de albaras	of alder
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" appears, and medicine does not help, then cauterize it with a warm cautery according to the thickness of the skin, so that the whiteness is removed and its color changes; then treat it with a poultice made of equal parts of bran, lentils, rosemary oil, plantain leaves, colon blood, and almond blood; mix everything together and apply it, covered with a cloth, until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of cancer by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a ulcer comes at first, and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with the cautery which seems like a circle, all around the edge of the ulcer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And yet the wise say that one should also make cautery in the middle of the ulcer; and yet it does not seem good to me, for I fear that it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have indeed seen this happen once; and a more straightforward thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery called 'circle', as we have said about many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has an illness called 'adubelati', and it lingers in dying, either because of the excess it causes or due to the age of the disease when it is decrepit (that is, very old), and there is little blood, or because of time; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize it all around with many small cauteries by pricking; after that leave it as it is.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing all the way through, then heat the cautery of which it is made:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" as long as the cautery has pierced the skin, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it drawing out in such a way that the pus is expelled.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the wound is healed completely.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cure by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	There is another type of disease called "corrodens", which is nothing other than a eating away of a limb, for it gnaws at the limbs just as fire consumes dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a place that can withstand cautery with fire, then heat the cautery iron both small and large, according to what is suitable for the place where the disease is; then cauterize it all over until you reach all the corruption, and none of it remains, so that all that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then he leaves it for three days, and applies the cauterized wool, crushed with oil, until the burns from the fire are healed, and all the corruption is gone.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of wounds caused by fire.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that the wound is not healing, then do the cautery again on the part which is still corrupted.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this wound is sometimes healed by a medicine applied directly, instead of fire cautery; but fire cautery is still the most effective treatment, and I have already described the cure for medicine ague in the previous section: apply it when needed.Et si le char ne guérit point par le feu, si le faut frotter de l’huile d’ierbe molle en la nuit, et au matines le lave de vin, et le frotte avec un couteau, tant qu’il n’est tout net.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of warts that come on the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that in the feet, due to moisture, a disease occurs which we call «clos», and is a hard growth which causes pain in the foot.Et si li clos ne se peult adiser par la frotion des oignemens, si le faut percer de clou en la nuit, et le matin lave de vin tuit hore; et si est alerge, si le faut tacher avec un peigne a barbe, tant qu’il soit guari.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this disease is in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, cautery by fire and cautery by hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Cautery by fire is done by heating the cautery tool as hot as a pen, and made of good iron to the measure that it can pierce the nail on all sides, and that it has fine edges; then apply it all around the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail; and leave the nail as is for three days until pus begins to come out; then make a poultice of wild mallows, and leave the poultice on overnight, and the nail will fall off and be uprooted from its roots.Cautere d’aigue chaude si est que li clous soit encombrez de sang et de mal veine, adonques mets un cauter de fer chaut sus le clou; s’il est encombret de sang, tu verras par le cauter qu’il viendra a la surface, et li clous sera desracinez.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then clean the wound with a salve until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are turned away from the body, and often happen in hands and feet, then you should administer hot water cautery; and it is in such a way: take an iron or bronze needle, or a pen of a quill, and place it on the nail and the cuticle, that is, warts; and place the needle so that it pricks all around, then put a drop of hot water, and hold your hand steady, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the needle comes to the root, and can find the hot water deep into the root; and let the patient endure the burning of the hot water for a little while; then leave it as it is, and it will be pulled out by its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another, as you draw out all those who are in the body, then heal them from the wounds that cause pus.
li cure dou trembler	the treatment for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone trembles from coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever or other [ailments], you should make four cauteries or six on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one cautery on the penis, and one on the stomach with the olive-oil cautery. It will stop the trembling and hasten the healing from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of stinking pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes they appear on the surface of the body as boils or stinking pustules that come from putrid matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If necessary, when they first appear, one should make a cautery on each tip of the pustule: a thin cautery made from myrrh wood, with its point taken to the fire, or from a long root of aristolochia, or with a lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow any further but the surplus is broken down and they become healthy; but it must be done after bloodletting.Et si il aduitat aler plus longuement, et n’at point de fin: li cauteres sont ainsis: l’un est feus de fer et d’argent, ou d’or, ou de laite d’argent, ou de plomb, ou d’airain, ou de laite d’airain.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great bleeding from the artery which is cut at the wound that comes to light, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cauterization of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to stanch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet when this happens to someone, you must hurry to place your index finger over the wound of the vein, and press it very hard until the blood is quiet beneath your finger, and no drop comes out; then take several olive-wood cauteries, both large and small according to the wound and the location where the artery is cut, and place the cautery on that vein where you are holding your finger, and hold the cautery there until the bleeding is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it bleeds again when you lift your finger from the wound, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another one of the cauteries that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease doing this one after the other until the bleeding is stopped; and be careful not to hurt the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be well stanched itself when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods we have described: by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong ligature, or by medicines placed on it that have power to stanch blood; and let it be bound and pressed firmly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever applies a tight bandage or places something hot on top, or uses similar remedies, will not find much relief if any.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if it happens to someone and there is no doctor or medicine available, he should put his finger on the wound as we have said, and apply pressure until it is stopped up; and he should not remove it but keep it moist with very cold water until the blood is congealed, swollen, and stopped up; and he should then seek a physician for cauterization and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of treatments for wounds.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about all the diseases that require cauterization with fire or burning remedies, and the properties, causes, instruments, and forms of cauteries; and I included that chapter from the head to the feet, and now I will continue this one on the same topic so that it is easier to find what you are looking for.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so that I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, for you to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauterization, and because of this, greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to embark on folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For there are many ways for people to come to harm.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	if they come from such who are so overwhelmed by their illness that they quickly die because of the severity of their illness; and one must fear these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And there are those who regain their senses and say, "wait, I am healed"; and the illness is relentless.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	You should not consent to those who come to you with such behavior, but place greater emphasis on your honor than on your desires. Do not act rashly but wisely in what you are certain of and from what you can obtain gain and fame; and use prophecy and indication in the cures of your illnesses so that salvation may be converted to it. This will help you attain a good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, may our Lord give you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have arranged this chapter for you in discussion according to chapters, just as it is before the chapter on cautery, which I discussed for you from the head to the feet, so that you may more easily find what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Do you know that this disease often comes to children at birth, and when the childbirth is too strong, it squeezes the baby's head; and sometimes it comes from a relaxed cause that one does not know about.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	I have never seen this disease in anyone but children, and in all those I have seen, death soon followed; therefore it seems to me that it would be better to leave the treatment in several stages.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head swelled every day until it could no longer support it; and it had such an abundance of moisture that it died, and this moisture is collected under the bone above the neck, between the brain and the bone; and if the moisture is between the brain and the bone, and the abscesses are small, then you should split a large opening in the middle of the head; and let it be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture runs out; and see the form of the spatumile:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the cavity is deeper and the abscesses are larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the creases of the head opening on each side, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand from within, and it does not close again; then you should split the head into three incisions in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all moisture forcefully.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Afterward, the cuts are bound with linen and powder, and wine and oil are applied; this is continued for five days. Then it is loosed, and the wound is treated by tenting and anointing; the head is extracted similarly, and the patient is fed dry meat to dry up moisture until the limb is healed and comfortable.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another method of incision is that you observe where the abscess opens, and the collection of pus; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut therefore where the abscess opens and the pus collects, and cut according to what you are able; and be careful not to cut the artery, for if blood flows and there is an evacuation of moisture, the patient may die from blood loss.
de reume	from gout
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to someone that they have a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or the feet, and the disease is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the last resort is cauterization with which one will cut the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you see them bent, have the patient look up; then rub the area beneath a coarse cloth until the arteries appear, then tightly bind the patient's neck with the whole cloth; then examine where the vein beats, and its locations are after the ears, and they are pressed upon; then mark these spots, then cover both with a sharp spatula in two places so that the incision reaches to the bone, and this is done on either side of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, insert the spatulum under the artery and cut it from above, cutting as deep as two fingers across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, the blood will flow out continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If the artery does not open to the touch, then you must measure the amount of space between three fingers, then cut from there and make an incision all the way to the bone; and the quantity of blood that should be let out is six fingers' width, and perhaps a little more or less, depending on what the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery; then examine the wound: if there remains any pus on top of the bone, so that the hot abscess does not come to it, then drain the wound and ligature, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of emetic
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old-age diarrhea comes and the catarrh is acute, due to moistures from tears and heat in the temples and ancient delirium and similar things, and it is treated by various methods of medicine and all that does not help him, then we must draw out the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them is that the patient pulls back the hair of his temples, and feels the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens easily by its pulse and is little repose outside when in some men who are too cold; and if it is reposed, he pulls his neck from some cloth, then rubs the area with some rough cloth, and washes the area with warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatulum of which there is the shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	then burn the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it upwards with tweezers, and separate it well from the tissues that are beneath it in each part; and if the artery is fine, then return it to the tip of the fingernail, then close that part according to the quantity of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, then the sickness will surely spread throughout his entire body.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw off the blood from 1/4 to 3/8 of an inch; and if the artery is large, it is necessary to tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk so that pus does not come out before the wound heals, and the blood flows gently; then cut away the excess between the two ties in the same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a hot-iron cautery until the bones are cut through; and this is the best treatment if the patient does not have fever and is of a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cautery helps to dry up moisture, so it is most helpful for moist wounds.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the place with old cotton and places it under well-made tent; and when they are taken off, they are treated with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with tents until it is healed; and if without cutting the artery as far as you work, hasten to cover it by cautery, or employ vitriol and stretch your hand so that the blood is stained; and if you do not have this present, put a bandage on the place so that the blood congeals, and wet the place with cold water so that the blood stops, and stretch it as it should be; and what is best and most gentle in the extraction of arteries is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery knife of 2 parts, but the blade must be well-spaced to retain its heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	Because when the instrument is too thin, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And there should be between the two knives a finger's width of space, and then when you have marked both places, you place the hot iron on until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and they should be spaced apart because they are not soldered by this cautery throughout; and that is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes are descending from the veins that are on the top of the head, and medicine does not help, and you see the face of the patient turning red, and in his forehead there is pulsation like trembling; and if their eyes are sunken and moist so that the eyelashes have fallen off, and the eyelids are swollen and burned by the tears, then this treatment is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called it in ancient times "cure contused", and it is that you do to the patient who has this disease, the hairs on his forehead, then make three cuts on the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the cuts be as long as two fingers right in the middle of the forehead, going downward just above the nose, and the other two on either side of the temples, and be careful not to cut the arteries that are on either side of the temples; and keep your hand away from the jaw, and each wound should be about a finger's width apart, and have a sponge ready with some cloth to soak up the blood, then use the spatulum to apply the medicine to both sides where the headache is located:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision that is to be on the temple up to the second incision; and scorch all of the skin between the two incisions up to the sinus that is on top of the bone, then remove this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you put into the first incision the instrument that is called "cultellar", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side it is smooth and not at all sharp, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the blade cutting towards the chest cavity, and the back of the blade towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the middle slit.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut through all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous to what opens in the chest, and then make another cut in the middle slit to the other defier; and then draw out blood equally, and express the site for the extracted blood; then put into each slit a tent of old cotton, and place moistened drapes in wine and oil and garlic, and be careful that hot abscesses do not come to it; and on the third day loosen the ligature, and administer a large amount of cold water, then cure with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other remedies for curing wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	from the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When one has an acute cataract that usually occurs, and you see the eyes thin and small, and weakened vision, and burnt eyelids; and the hair falls out, and in the head there is pain, and the patient sneezes; then from these signs you know that those matters and this cataract come from many veins, and the cure for it is to let it be, as it is.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you command the patient to lean back his head, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another from the large eye socket.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begin from the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves in the temples that control swallowing; and when the bone is exposed, soak up all the blood with a sponge, and then insert old cotton between the two lips of the incision and pack it with lint; then bind damp cloths soaked in wine and oil over it, and beware of hot abscesses; once it is removed, you should rub the bone until warm blood starts to flow, then treat it with astringent substances that promote clotting.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this way: take two parts of flower of wheat and four parts of colophony, and make an ointment from it; and administer it to these wounds to dry up pus throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	the cleaning of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of four things: either grains or a stone or ore; or something flowing, like water and garlic and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it is stuck in the ear or another kind of object that does not adhere to or grow in the ear, put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, then distil a little oil of violets or oil of hellebore, and then administer extraction; and let him sneeze from scent, and plug his nostrils when he sneezes, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ears, and prop the ears up on top.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times it comes out through this treatment; and if it does not come out, then administer extraction with subtle pincers, whose form is thus:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out with the pincers, that is good; if not, then bring about extraction with a fine needle of small wire; and if it does not come out in this way, then make a hook of bronze and insert the end of the hook into the hole of the ear firmly, and stop up what is around the hook with soft wax so that the air cannot enter with the hook; then pull it out forcefully, for very often it comes out as we have said. And if it does not come out in this manner, then take some glue from which birds are caught, and put into it some instrument that is appropriate for doing this, and place some cotton around it; then press the glue onto the pebble or whatever it is, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not come out from all these things that we have said, then you must hurry to split the ear so that the abscess and inflammation will come out, and the spasm; and the manner of the splitting is such that you first make the patient lean his head back, and draw blood according to the measure of its strength, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear upward, and make a small split in the root of the ear at the fatty part from which it depends; and let the split be like a moon, so that you come to the pebble, then extract it according to your ability, and suck it strongly with your mouth; and treat it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grain which is inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then apply a thin spatula according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision on that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think that the grains are moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many incisions; then extract it with subtle pincers and a suction cup, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.Si li estrazione de la piere ne soit fort dificile, si covient qu’il se fiet truchement de suc d’arbes qui soit aligeant a la piere, et que il ne blesse point le membre; car si il le blesse, li est a grant danger.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the earache therefore that is sharp in the ear, the patient should use sneezing of first-rate remedies, and fill the ear with soft cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And he should lie down on that same ear where the ache is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	if it jumps out because of this, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	if it does not, take many stones according to the size of your little finger, thin and light, and heat them in fire; then insert one into the ear and press down on it from above with another stone; and take another stone and press down on the stone that is in the ear; and continue to do this with one stone after another until all the ache comes out, and so it will all come out; and if you see any pus, take a straw, insert one end into the ear and heat the other end in fire until the most painful straw is burned; then do the same with another straw until all the ache is gone, as we have said for the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of an insect, if it is a small body, like a flea or similar, treat it as we have said in the division section. But if it is a large body that can be felt, administer extraction with pincers; and this is the easiest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the section on distillations, and the treatment does not help, then you should examine the ear in the sun; if there are any worms, pull them out with fine tweezers, and if they do not appear, take a cockerel's comb, from which is taken the dye:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it is tight below and loose above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And insert the thinnest end of the needle into the ear according to the amount of the suffering of the malady, then suck strongly on the cannula; do this repeatedly until all the pus comes out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not come out, then plug the cannula with cotton as I have said for the stone; and if they do not come out as we have said, then administer distilling remedies that the ancients have experimented with for worm-cutting, and you will find them in the section on distilleries; and distill your oils and remedies into the ear through this instrument, whose form is as follows:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it is made of silver or brass with a narrow end and a wider top for distillation; and to press the distillation into the ear use an instrument of well-crafted brass, and if you wish, take a razor and wrap cotton around the blade; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicines you wish, into the cockerel's comb, and let the comb be in the ear; then insert the razor with all the cotton inside, and press your hand gently so that the oil is distilled into the ear canal; and the patient will feel it inside, and the distillation should be slightly warm as one heats it over the fire; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not then be so effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	the cleaning of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without an eardrum; and the same thing happens to men through the cleaning of a wound, or from pus forming within the ear, and sometimes this cleaning reaches deep into the ear, so that one cannot see it; and sometimes there is only a little discharge, which can be seen clearly.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, when it occurs deep within the ear and cannot be seen, it is a matter of painful healing in various conditions, and in this case, one should put the affected ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the membrane appearing, then it is working as it should.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And it should be sharp and smooth both in front and behind, so that it does not pierce the ear; if the membrane is due to pus or the body of the ear, then grab it with thin pins and gently scrape it, until all the pus is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the growth is deep in the ear, take a thin, light scalpel and heat it slightly in the fire, then place it on the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the piercing pain that the patient feels on hearing, pierce gently, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then put a tent in the ear according to the size of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this every day until the wound is closed, then take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and sprinkle powdered vitriated copper on top; and if you see the ear swollen, then it is fitting to pull out the tent and insert another tent moistened with cerotum made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then treat it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge and cloth in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding that are used for distilling remedies.
de la char des papieres	of the charcoal of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This poultice comes in papers from the herbs when they are moist and dry, so you should spread them with tongs and tweezers, and the top of a spatula from its roots; then put ground vitriol on the spot.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without the outer skin, then cauterize with a lens subtlety, and the cautery after the incision is worth moving; and many times they return, as long as nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of hail
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times there come on the ears things that look like gravel in their shape and hardness, and because of this the disease is called "hail", and it is a mass of moisture thick on top and bottom; the treatment is as follows: if the hail mutates from one side to another, and it is an easy thing to know, then open it with forceps, then peel off each layer gently, then take it with tweezers, and cut it out.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	if you cannot cut it out without piercing the membrane, do not trouble the patient at all; and if the split is large, sew it up with a stitch, and treat it until it heals; and if it is small, do not use force on it, for ointments will heal it immediately and prevent infection.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hematoma is descending into the ear towards the upper part, reverse the paper, and hold it with tweezers, and press from both sides; and if the paper is removed by the incision, that is not a problem; and when the hematoma is pressed, wash the eye with salted water, and cure the place of what exudes pus until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a fat that is woven into the webs of paper above, and this happens more to children than to anyone else, and it weighs heavily on themselves, and they get the catharsis in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears hasten to their own eyes; and because of this, they lie down on their faces, and sleep on top of them, and their papers are under their eyelids, moistening that which the inflammation and appearance have covered with exinach, which appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the area between your fingers and feel the exinach coming out between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient puts his head on the lap of the healthy person; and then take .i. linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the form of a circle according to the quantity that exinach contains in each part, and then put it over him; and press with your fingers from both sides, so that the exinach is gathered inside the circle. Then make an incision in the middle of the moistened spatumile, not any larger than the wound made in vein opening; and cut into the skin deeply enough so that you reach the exinach; and in various dispositions, exinach comes out of the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Remove the bandage completely from one side between your fingers, and move your hand back and forth so that it is loose; and be careful not to push into the wound, otherwise you will reach all the way to the eye and cause bleeding.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the wound opens at the beginning of the slit, gently open it slightly so that it appears; then remove it as we have said, then wet bandages in vinegar and water, place them on the area, and tie with a bandage.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who grind salt and place it on to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the eye until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a hot abscess comes to that area, treat it with soothing poultices until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	And if the pain is in the neck or mouth, then have the animal drink wine and brew, and apply apricot oil and powder to the area.
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow from papers unlike nature, and are enveillit, they harm themselves and bring on various diseases such as laments and the softening of papers and albugine, until it leads to their destruction; and there are four ways to treat this: by cautery with fire, or by medicine water according to what is before the cautery chapter, and it is done either by incision and sewing or by splints, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You should place the affected area in your dominant hand, then hold the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it turns, that's good, but if not, insert a needle with thread through it; and this should be done near the edge of the paper where the hairs are growing, and weave one thread throughout the entire paper, and then return it to the razing tool; next, make an incision in the area under the paper, under the abnormal hairs, all the way to the spatumile, cutting through the large and small larmier; then remove the thread and place a small tent of cotton and cloth under the paper, and sign a figure of enche on the paper, like a fuelle of mirte, and the shape should be according to the amount you see the paper rising.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	If you have paper that is needed, cut it into a large amount according to how soft the paper is; then mark the entire spatumile along the two lines you have marked, and start from the larger one to the smaller; and let one of the slits be near the natural hair in the thickness of a root, then insert the needle into one of the two corners of the heart, then cut it all off; then bring the two lips together with a stitch of a thin woolen thread using an awl, and wipe away the blood, and dry the excess of the threads on the two sour eyes with any glue-like substance you see fit to use; if not, then don't worry about it, and leave the stitch and threads for three or four days; then cure the wound without stitches using dry and constricting substances, because the paper will lift up at the wound's souding and joining, but the stitch is painful (as the ancients say), and this work causes no fear; there is another way: you mark the paper in a shape like the leaf of a myrtle tree, as we have described, with three slits spaced according to the form that is shown here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut out what is on top with small scissors evenly according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the tongs, and the object is not even, then take a needle with some thread, and insert it into the wound; and take another thread next to the large blood vessel, and the second thread next to the small one, and bring the threads together between your fingers evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin on which you have made the sign, as we have described, then bring the two lips of the wound together with stitches, and heal it until it is cured; and if an abscess comes to your incision, calm it with cerotic ointment and similar soothing ointments; and sometimes the hairs of the paper are converted: so you should use what we have said about the incision; but the stitching on both sides is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of the bones is as follows: you must turn over the parchment and put it inside according to what I have said, and then make two bones by art, and two thin ligatures as long as the parchment and the width of the spine; and cut two heads into two parts where you hold the threads; then assemble them both subtly above what is on top of the parchment of the eye, and strain the two bones out of their two formed parts; and leave it like this for some days, and the skin that was strained will die and harden and fall off as it drops by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it persists and the wound has strength, then heal it until it is cured; and when the wound is closed, and the paper is raised, and the hairs no longer hurt; and this is the form of the two cannings that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The procedures are such that you pierce a fine needle and thread in with a thin, soft silk thread; then assemble the heads and tie them together subtly, and let the length of the threads be about a palm long; then arrange another thin silk thread in the case, and tie the end of the thread; then put the patient's head in your hand; and have it exposed to sunlight so that the procedures are declared, for this is a subtle and fine procedure, then pierce the needle through the parchment directly onto the hair, drawing it up through the parchment until it reaches the case, and thread that hair into the case, whether there is one or two or three or more; then withdraw your hand so that the hairs come out straight through the case with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hunt is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then you will treat the hunt from below to the very thread that you ordered for it, until the hunt comes out through the hole above and you see it with your eye; then you will pull the hunt and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for 1 or 2 days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh grows over it; and if the hair is short, accompany one long hair from the horse's tail, and let it grow with that one, until it is elongated and then you release it.
de la porriture de l’oil	from the pustule of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease called "alacrity" or warts comes in the eye, there are two ways it occurs: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from cutting or cauterizing, and in similar ways.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way to treat it is that you split the ulcer, and loosen the edges of it, and place within it tents made of linen, and dress it until it is healed; and one must not use in its treatment anything that would dry it out or constrict it.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do that, the disease will return worse than before; but one should use softening things, such as fenugreek; and rosewater or water made alcoholic with honey, and seeds of flax cooked in it, and ointments of aquilone softened in some of the oils, and one should wrap a tent around it, and dress it thus.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the goal of your treatment is that you take care not to let it heal according to its previous form; and these works that we have described are remedies for this disease so that it does not return to its previous form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the pus that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease, which is beneath that which is truly called "axacrati", is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Accidents come from wounds and incisions and cauterization and similar things; the way to treat them is to take a needle with a double thread, pierce it into the flesh, and make it go through from one armpit to the other so that the threads come out on both sides of the body. Then, the flesh above the needle is lifted up to the shoulder blade, and the cup is placed over the armpit widely.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the wound returns as it should, that is good; but if not, then take a razor and put it in the incision, and turn the wound over, and make two incisions along the edge inside the wound; and let the two corners of the incisions be on either side of the incision you have made, and form angles so that when they are brought together, the shape is like that of the letter "Y" in the German alphabet; then remove the flesh, according to the quantity that is attached under the wound, from that which follows the wound, and then join the two severed parts and sew them with a thread of wool; then treat it as we have said, with softening medicines and bandages, until it heals.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a split or stitch or cautery, then you should make a clean split under the hairs of the scalp, and according to what is mentioned above; then unsheathe between the two lips of a tent, as I have said; and one must perform the operation according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise master prepares remedies with all his power so that he makes the figure return to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what he needs in terms of treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	And suddenly from the scalp
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this soudure occurs in a similar manner to that of the scalp, with the paper above being separated from the white of the eye, and unable to move or perform its natural functions, then you must therefore pierce the point of a razor under the paper and lift it up; and press it with tweezers until you grab what is open in the sphynctered subtile, which is neither too sharp nor too trench-like, so that the patient cannot bear the pain of the sphyncter being too sharp and bleeding the eye; and make your incision to peel off this union lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and when all of this assembly is healed, they sometimes have watery eyes with a saline solution, and the eye is raised with soft wool; then put a tent made of linen between the paper and the eye, and place moistened wool on top of the eye; and after the third day, use the collyrium and soothing remedies until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the eyelid
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	You should know that there are two types of nail: one is nervy and resembles a hard wart; the other is not nervy but resembles white congealed moisture, which, when touched with iron and pinched as though to break it, cannot be broken by anyone. Both types originate near the inner corner of the eye and grow little by little until they cover the entire eyelid and obscure all light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of incision is that the patient should place his head in your lap, then open his eyes; hold the piece of paper in your hand, then grip the nail with small forceps and lift it up; next, take a needle, thread a horsehair, or cow's hair, or bull's hair through it, and double over the tip of the needle a little and insert it into the nail, then tie the nail with a thread and lift it up, and scrape along the side of the nail where the eyelid follows the tear duct down to the lash line, then cut the remaining portion at the root of the tear duct, carefully and with small forces, until you reach the delicate sphincter; leave the natural tissue of the tear duct alone so that no incision comes near it. Sometimes only the nail at the inner corner needs to be lifted and tied as described above; then scrape all around the sphincter, for this is where the form lies:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful not to touch and break the fleshy membrane, or pierce the eyelid; after the incision, drop a little crushed vitriol into the eye, and place a collar of litarge around the eye, leaving it on until the next day; then treat the eye as needed until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	If the nail is not sensitive and you cannot pierce it with a needle, and the hook cannot enter, this nail-like appearance is often cured by medicine; and it grows back as I have described in the section on division. And if you see it covered, then treat the eye of the patient, and take the spatulum, a small and sharp tool, according to this shape:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And lift the nail gently, and if you see that it does not thin out and the cuticle recedes, then drop a collar made of litarge and red copper and ground seal from your mouth into the eye; then stop up the eye until the next day. Then the next day, repeat the other procedure according to this same method, until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary in the eye, as with a hot abscess, then milk it, and first treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then repeat the procedure as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the eyelid causes great harm in the eye, then pierce it with an awl and scoop out a portion but not all of it, so that the body of tears does not enter; then drop into the eye a red collar made from litarge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows over the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	In some men's eyes, a red blister sometimes forms, covering the eyeball and constricting it under the eyelids, resembling a rose on a wall; the patient then puts his head down to you, after which you work on the eye, and with all that heat, you push the flesh towards the nails, holding it there with force; then cut into the first blister, and continue cutting all the way to the root, being careful not to hurt the eye during the procedure; the incision should be made as we described in the section on finger incisions, using gentle forces to remove the nail, as demonstrated in this chapter; when the incision is complete and all the flesh has been removed, apply seal oil or similar corrosive medicines, and put cotton wetted with egg white over the eye to prevent a hot abscess from forming; if nothing remains, and the white of the eye turns red, indicating a hot abscess, then leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with soothing remedies for hot abscesses; then return to your work until it is healed, and likewise, do this for any blisters that form on the eye in this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, you should adapt the treatment to each weak eye according to its natural condition; and for accidental conditions, use an iron instrument in your treatment; and do not insert your finger into any of these treatments until you see that this member can bear that treatment.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of them
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Such are red veins that are covered over the eye, and obscure its sight and weaken the eye all day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore, first, you must examine the eye to see if it has any other disease besides the red veins; then treat it in this manner: instruct the patient to rest his head in your lap, then press those veins gently all around according to your wisdom, and let the pressings be subtle twice according to this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two folds by degrees in one body according to this shape:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then press those veins gently, and draw out the blood drop by drop after each other, until you see the veins removed from the eye; and be careful not to pierce the eye with the tips of the spatulae, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very skillful in your work so that you do not touch anything but the veins; and when you have done this, distil into the eye green and red collyrium to corrupt what remains of the cyst.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot collect all that in that hour, then make a poultice of things soothing the pain of the eyes, and leave it for several days until the pain is eased and there is a warm abscess, then begin again according to this method that is before until it is healed; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the eye fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	Examine the 'arissati' fistula closely: when you heal it with cautery and hot medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, there is a hole in it where you must cut into the abscess, removing all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption and blackness, then there is the cause of this malady; it is called  'aspre chief'  and should be treated by making an incision from one side to the other, puncturing like a file as shown in the present figure.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it over the site of the corrupt bone, then turn it between your fingers and press your hand a little while you know that the corruption is gone; and do this several times, then restore the site with drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the place is swollen and pus forms and the body of the fistula is swollen and remains that way for 40 days without healing and no bad accident occurs, then you can be sure it is healed; if not, there is another method to bring the fistula to a hole in the nose according to this form: you must uncover the bone with iron a second time and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered, grab it with forceps according to this form, and let the head of the iron be three-pronged, and let the shaft be tapered down to the tip as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then he places it on the bone below the eyeball, and moves his hand away from the eye a little, then returns to press the needle all the way through the bone until he feels the patient's pulse through the bone if he keeps his hand on his wrist; then he should apply dry medicine as I have taught you, and when the flesh heals and hardens, he should examine the wound; then it is lighter for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes open fully all around and there is no disturbance to the brain or thinning, then you should ligature the patient; then treat the eye, then place cups or suckers without piercing to draw out, then apply a poultice over the eye made of acacia and aloe and incense and myrrh, and then bind the eye tightly with bandages and clothes; and the manner of the clothes is that you take quite soft clothes, double each in four, and then place one upon another according to the quantity that the eye needs; then tighten it from above with a hard bandage, and repeat the cups to draw out without piercing; then remove the cups and leave the eye tightened day and night, and if the ligature softens, you should tighten it greatly; then remove the ligature after a day and a night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good; if not, then restart the poultice and the clothes and the ligature and the cups until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	from the bursting of a web
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions come in the woven web, then it opens and comes out of the papers like a grain of resin, and is terrible to see; therefore, if you see it covered, the work is such that you push a needle into the root of the part underneath up to the part above, then push another needle where there is a double thread in the part of the eye; and pierce it, and leave the first needle according to its position; then cover the place of the double thread and tie one part of the web around, and tighten it well, then remove the needle and put a soft lamb's wool on top; and let it be until the threads break with the membrane, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restrained by the web in each part by a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes cause much distress, pierce them with a sharp spatule that comes from the bottom of the eye, and dry the white moisture and lower the eyes, and enter in at once; then pull until they are healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the bottom of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called "alcunnati" is nothing other than a tumor which is assembled in the eye, resembling descending water, but it is not water; and the manner of its appearance in the treatment is that you make the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat, then hold his head between your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the tumor come up to your eyes; then it should be punctured, and the light should be blocked so that the patient can see things as he used to; and if it does not go down below, know that it is a tumor, but if the swelling of the tumor is not apparent as we have said,
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the spatulum and gently pry up the conjunctiva from the cornea and the cornea itself, until the membrane is loosened; and when it has been released, distill into the eye hot water mixed with honey, or water in which fenugreek and honey have been boiled, and then treat it further until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the eye waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have already discussed the appearance of the diseases in this section and what should be done to pierce them; now act according to these instructions for the sake of health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	You should make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and squeeze the healthy eye firmly; then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your right hand if they are on the right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called "almagda," or in your left hand if they are on the right; then place the tip of the instrument along the edge of the cornea through the white part of the eye to the edge of the lower eyelid, and press the instrument gently, and turn your hand so that almagda pierces through the white part of the eye, and you will feel that almagda reaches the empty space; and the depth of the channel of almagda should be equal to the thickness of a prune from the edge of the blackness; this is the cornea of the eye; then you will see the bone in the paper due to the clarity of the corneal membrane, and then push the instrument down to where the water is, then express it under one channel after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	if the water now runs down, then let the patient see the instrument in front of him and look at it.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting for a little while, and if the water flows back up the second way, push it out with the instrument, and when it is lodged and does not flow upwards again, gently extract the alma-guda by twisting your hand a little; then put some gem-stone powder into the eye.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then apply to the eye a sponge or lamb's wool soaked in rose oil and abundant egg white, and bind it up with clean cloth.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, put on powdered comfrey mixed with abundant egg white.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, because there are some people whose eyes are too hard, then you should take the instrument called  "alberit", of which this is the shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And so, piercing only the conjunctiva, and not going too deep, but making the incision subtle; then put in the alma-guda as we have said; and when the treatment is complete, prepare for the patient a dark sleeping place where he sleeps on his back in a dimly lit room; and he should be free of all movement, and eat light foods, and not move his head to the right or left, and he should be bound according to his condition for three days; then untie him in that same dimly lit house, and test his vision, and let him see some things, and then put on the bandage again until the seventh day; and you should not do this during the hour of the treatment or after the incision now, but you should ease it so that the water rises gently.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	if such an abscess comes, you should loosen the eye before the seventh day, and apply what soothes the abscess; and when it is soothed, then loosen the eyelid and put a gold ring over it to cover the eye, and let him remain in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	Then exit the house little by little, and return to his own house; and know that no disciple should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from Persia, who told us that in his country they pierce with alum, causing water to flow out, but I have never seen anyone doing this in our land, nor have I read of it in any books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them will see them; and they should be made of brass properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And the tips of these pliers should be of the same subtlety, and the handles in .iij. angles bent.
de la char sor le neis	of the heart above the chest
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes there are born or are found horses with diverse deformities, from which some seem like scorpions with many feet; and there are others with hooves of a dark color, and also hoofless ones with good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	With those of these horses that are hoofless and not deformed, you should make the patient sit in your lap facing the sun; open his nostrils, and pour something into the horse's nose and lead him away; then hold what you can reach with a very subtle, pointed instrument until you know that the horse has been completely cured.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if anything remains which one cannot cover, then open it with one of the subtle instruments lightly so that nothing remains; and if without swelling, or an abscess occurs, then lances it as it should be; and if they are malignant abscesses, then hasten to cauterize them until the pus is stanched and all the corruption is removed, then pour in wine or vinegar.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If it works and moisture comes up to the palate, you know that it is healthy; and if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, you know that there is rotten meat in the bone above, because the instruments do not come to cut: therefore you must put a piece of linen thread, quite thick, through the nose, and let it hang down with a nodule at each end, about an inch or less between each; and the patient holds the end of the thread in his mouth as far back as he can, and pulls it through until it comes out of the nose; and children often do this at school, and it is easy for anyone who wants to do it; then hold one end, which comes out of the nose, in one hand, and the other end, which comes out of the mouth, in the other hand, and draw them both gently while you feel the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this as long as you know that the nails have corrupted the flesh, then pull the nail, wash the blood, and moisten the nail in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments corroses all that is left of the flesh; and then put a plug of lead in the nose for a few days until it heals, and if it needs dry medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to cleanse the head, with which one distils oils and medicines into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	It should be made of silver or bronze, resembling an open lamp, like a tube, and the instruments should be inserted into it; and if you wish, make a closed tube, and fill it with medicine to cleanse the nose; and there should be a handle on the instrument to hold it while heating the oil or any other liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the heart above the chest
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "telul" arises at the top of the head, and it grows and becomes great sores, so much so that it is visible to the eye; therefore, you should cut it at the beginning, and remove all the pus, then place the cautery or burning medicine on it; and if one delays cutting it until it becomes large, take heed whether it is hard, of a dark color, and lacking in feeling: do not touch it with iron, for it is an abscess, and when one cuts it, great harm comes to the patient. And if the abscess is due to pressure rather than a dark color, and you see that one can cut it all away, then drain the patient and cut it without fear, and clean the area of dry, constricting substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose has been cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when solution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilage structures, it benefits few people.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, when this happens to someone, look to see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then attach the two lips together with a stitch, then heal it; and if the lips are separated on both sides, you should scorch all parts of their skin until they heal, then sew the two lips together, and apply powder upon powder of dragon's blood, and ground incense; and place an ointment of strong or other binding ointment over the powders, and let it heal by itself, then cleanse it with ointment.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of sewing is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in sewing the belly; or with thread, as I have told you before.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the mouth there are hard abscesses inside the lips, similar to grains of wheat, both smaller and larger; therefore, you should split the lips, cut into each node, and squeeze it in every part; then apply vitriol powder after incision, until the blood is stanched; then use a poultice of garlic, and clean the area with dry things until it heals.
de la char des gencives	of gum bleeding
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times a growth arises on the gums, which the ancients call "albus". You should hold it with tweezers and cut at its root, letting the pus or blood flow; then place powdered vitriol or other drying and constricting powders over the wound. If the growth returns after the incision, and this often happens, cut it again and cauterize it; if it does not return after cauterization, that is how you treat an abscess.
des sordens	from sorens
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are gathered at the top of the teeth inside the mouth between the gums, and there are ugly and rough growths; sometimes the teeth are black, yellow, or green, indicating that corruption has reached the gum, and they smell bad; so you should have the patient hold his head in your hands, and press his teeth so that they are exposed, until nothing remains; and in this way, deal with blackness, yellowness, and other discoloration, until they are cleaned. If what is removed at first bleeding is good, it's fine; if not, then do it again the next day and the third day, until everything is removed. And know that teeth need different forms of instruments to clean them according to what their condition shows, so that the scaler with which one cleans between the teeth has other forms than those with which one cleans the tops of the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared for you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you treat a toothache, it is important to wait as long as possible before pulling the tooth, because it is a very serious matter and one should have no excuse for not treating it properly.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then, when the patient is forced to pull, you must be certain of the tooth that is causing the pain.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the pain deceives the patient, and he believes it is in a sound tooth, and pulls out the good tooth; and still the pain does not go away because of this, as long as the evil tooth remains, for we have already tried this with these healers; and when you are certain of the tooth that causes the pain, you must scrape around the tooth all around with a strong spatula to push back the gum on all sides; then he pulls it with his fingers or with fine tweezers, little by little, until it is well loosened, then he firmly holds the tweezers and the patient's jaw in your lap, so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After that, pull out the tooth carefully without breaking it, and if it will not come out, take one of these instruments and insert it into each side gently, then move it as you did before.And when it is extracted, it is necessary to stop the bleeding with a sponge, and to apply a poultice made of egg white, honey, and rose water over the wound, and to bind it tightly with a bandage.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the teeth are pierced and eaten, then you must fill the holes with pieces of cloth; and then gently pull them with tweezers so they do not break on being pulled; and one must work very gently around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be careful that you do not break it and leave a part of it behind, for then the illness will return with greater pain due to the root's maliciousness.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And beware of doing as ignorant surgeons do, who in their haste and audacity sometimes break the tooth, and don't follow our advice; but sometimes they bring about great illness due to the roots that remain, or because they break the tooth, as we have often seen. And when the tooth is pulled, wash the place with wine or garlic and salt; and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, apply powdered vitriol to the site; and if that doesn't work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shape of the instruments, which are mute when hitting teeth first, should have long points and thick handles so that they do not bend when you hit the tooth; these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be made of thick, well-made iron, and have teeth to hold the mucus.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains in the tract, you should put wet cotton soaked in butter over it for a day or two.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the area is softened; then insert the tweezers called "algefri", which make the shoulder look like a sick bird's beak; and inside, they are shaped like a file, and that is their form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots will not come out with these tweezers, you must uncover the flesh all around the root and place the instrument called "althali", which is to say, tongs, of which this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And it should be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root slips out through this, that is good; if not, then use all the instruments, of which the forms come below:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And one should use this instrument which has two branches, of which this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other instruments which are in the reason of the teeth, and of this instrument which looks like large tweezers, of which this is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	Let this instrument be outside so that it cannot break, and know that there are many dental instruments; and also other instruments which are not counted; and the wise master finds by himself his instrument according to what his works and the disease show him, for there are many diseases in which the ancients did not teach any instrument because of their diversity. And if it does not break or pierce the bone, but protrudes, then he seeks the instruments that he needs, as I have told you, and helps with gestures, from which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and strong enough to hold the bone so that it doesn't slip, but can be held and removed; and then restore the place with appropriate medicines. And if there is a protrusion in the bone, and it is small, then cut it out with this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When a tooth appears not according to the natural order of the body, and its shape is ugly, especially in virgin women, then you should know whether the tooth is new after the tooth, and is not in the right place, and cannot be filed or ground down. Then pull it out; and if there is pus with the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is like a small beak, and let it be made of iron with a sharp edge on its end:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And push it in and out gently due to the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others. And if it is apparent that it can be filed, then file it with a special file as shown in the form:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is like the file with which needles are made; and gently file the tooth a little at a time by hand, so that it does not move until it chips; then smooth it completely at the end with a file, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, one should file down the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth is loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth is loosened by either percussion or biting down, and the patient cannot press on what he is eating without defecating, and you have treated them with constricting remedies which do not work, then they should be restrained with a gold wire, because silver wires turn green and rust, but gold never moves; and the wire should be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the amount of space between the teeth. And if you see the teeth tilting, take the wire and wrap it twice around the two healthy teeth, then put the shoulder joint in between the teeth, whether there is one or more of them, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then begin the cover again as far as where you started, and gently tighten your hand until there is bleeding, so that it does not move. And the gold wire should be placed at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then pull the teeth of the thread with a pair of tweezers, and bring them together, and press them between the healthy teeth, and place it so that it does not cut the tongue; then leave it tight as long as it can stay, and if it slips or the threads break, then hold it in place with another thread; let it remain and serve like this for all its time, and this is the shape of the teeth and the arrangement of the two healthy teeth, and the two bad ones, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when a tooth falls out, it is put back in its place, little by little, as we have said; and only a wise and experienced person should do this, because sometimes the shape of a tooth is made from cow bone, and put in where the defect is, and tied as we have said, and it remains and serves like this for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover the wound of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Sometimes this ligament, which comes under the tongue by nature, is born like that; or it can be caused by an accident from a wound; and the treatment is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold his head in your healthy hand, and lift up his tongue; then grab the thick nervous ligament so that the tongue is separated from its place, and if there is hardness or a knot, it is due to a sudden wound, then cut it with scissors; and be careful that the incision is not too deep, because of the artery that is underneath; and when you have finished, raise the hand with water and garlic, or cold water, then place a tent of linen under the tongue; and every night, tie the patient's tongue so that it does not adhere.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if bleeding occurs, apply powdered vitriol to the area; and if the blood clogs, cauterize with a lentigo cautery, which is good for this. Then treat it further until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it discolored, black, or hardened, and the patient does not feel any pain, then do not touch it, as it is a ulcer; and if it is leaning towards a blister and there is moisture, apply the unguent of spathumile subtil and drain it from both sides. If blood oozes out during your treatment, apply vitriol until it dries up, then return to your treatment until you draw out all the pus. Afterwards, wash the area with water and soap, and treat it further until it is completely healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	Of abscesses in the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes there occur in the throat ulcers called "godath", and they are properly called almonds; when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they do not heal, then take heed: if they are hard abscesses of small size and a light color, do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also for fear of bleeding; but let it be until it is dead, and then you will burst it, or it will break by itself; and if it is of a white color and the root is thin, have an instrument to cover it, but first look to see if the abscess is calm and pacified.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then have the patient sit facing the sun, and his head in your lap, and open his mouth and hold his tongue between your fingers, and press it down to the root of the instrument, with which you will make the shape; and let it be of fine silver or brass as thin as a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	While pressing the tongue against the instrument, you will see the abscess; take the hook and insert it into the almond, pulling it upwards as hard as you can. Bring out any pus with it, then scrape the instrument against the abscess again, so that it forms a point; this is how it should look, like a sharp spike. The head of the instrument should be curved, one end curved in one direction and the other in the opposite direction, very thin, and made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument available, you can use tongs, shaped like this:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And let it be sharp on one side and blunt on the other; and when you have cut one of the tonsils, cut the other according to the same method, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and water and garlic, and if bleeding occurs, gargle the patient with water, or with peels of pomegranates that have been cooked, or with myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then cure it until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses besides the two tonsils develop in the throat, so cut them then as you did the two tonsils.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	I treated a woman for an abscess that was deep inside her throat, specifically, it was a small, but very sensitive abscess; and the whole throat was swollen closed so the woman could not breathe through the windpipe which was blocked by the swelling, nor eat or drink, and she would have died if it continued like this for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess had grown so much that it had forced its way out through the two openings of the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I quickly cut into one of the openings in her nose then pulled the pus out and cleared a large portion of it; I then cut into the other opening in her nose and cleared that too, then opened up her mouth and pressed her tongue down to the root of the instrument with which I was cutting. Then I cut into the abscess again and scooped out part of it, but only a little blood came out. So the windpipe in her throat was cleared and she could drink water and wine, and I continued to cut into that abscess for a long time; and the abscess would grow again and fill up the space I had emptied, so much so that it became very large; then I packed it with a poultice and cauterized it inside her throat. In this way it stopped growing. And I left these parts and did not hear of her after me.
de l’uve	of the liver
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When swelling descends to the eye, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is swollen and round below, it is called an "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the abscess is eased, and it is subtle; and if it is round and not long, and it is blood-red or a fuschia color or black, then you should avoid cutting into it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it according to the manner that I have described, of its white and length, you should have the patient sit facing the sun, and press his tongue against the instrument which we have mentioned earlier; then insert the needle into the eye, and draw it out from below, and scoop it with one of the two instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you should not cover anything more than the superfluity that is beyond the natural term; for if you cover more, it weighs on the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two testicles, and heal until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear from covering, then you should use the cautery of the sense of fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is for hot agaric.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of the cautery is for the hot agaric. And it is that the patient puts his head in yours, and then presses his tongue against the instrument that we have described in the chapter on cauterization, and dissolves with strong water, so that it is neither too thick nor too clear; and use the application of this instrument, from which comes the shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it has a stem at its tip where the medicine is placed, like the handle of a spoon, and you place the instrument with all the medicine on top of the eye; and the patient should lie on his side so that the saliva and mucus from the medicine flow out of his mouth and do not go down his throat and into his lungs. Then hold your hand over the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour, until you see it become soft and the sting of the medicine lessen. And if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and wet the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument completely into the cotton on top, so that the cotton sticks to the eye; and do this often until the cautery is complete, then leave it to dry and fall off after four or five days. And if you need to reapply the cautery, do so, and afterwards wash the area around the medicine with cotton dipped in butter, and cleanse what is around the medicine; and use rose water, and treat it with gargles until it heals.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision or cautery; if it is treated by fumigation in this way, take calamin, hyssop, oregano, rue, chamomile, avens, and similar herbs, and mix them all or some of them in a pot, and add garlic, and let it boil. And the pot should be well glued with strong clay, and in the pot there is an instrument shaped like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	Whether made of silver or bronze, place one of the tools in the mouth of the patient so that the vapors rise to the eye through the canal, until the eye is numbed; then repeat often, until the eye dries out. Be careful not to do this at the beginning of a hot abscess, as many things can go wrong; and do not do it after the hot abscess has subsided.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not available, take a straw and place an egg yolk in the end, so that the mouth of the patient is not too hot; for the egg yolk does not allow the vapors to harm the mouth, and it is a beneficial remedy together.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times a bone or fish spine, or some other thing gets stuck in the throat; so you must pull out what you can see and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you can move the object; and if it does not appear to you and is lodged in the throat, you must make the patient vomit so that the meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps the thing will come out through vomiting. Or the patient may swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread; tie a thread to the sponge and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will get stuck, and then you can pull it out; and if it does not come out in the way we have said, take an instrument of salt plaster according to this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument be curved at the end so that it can enter the throat more easily, and let the head be raised upwards; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, lest it be broken, nor push the bone in; and move so that the patient swallows the instrument, so that he is moved where the object is lodged; then he swallows it, or you pull it out with the instrument equally, until it is out.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the blood from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Sometimes the blood is bled, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not help, then look into the throat of the patient towards the sun, then press his tongue with the tool that I told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see blood, draw it out with a tiny hook, or with fine tweezers that are suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	If this doesn't work, take a small horsehair and put it in the wound, then heat the hair with hot iron, and do this repeatedly.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient has a fever all day:
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth and pour it in without swallowing, and move it around with their hand frequently; as soon as the blood touches the water, it will stop.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it doesn't stop as we have said, then smoke the patient with assafetida, using the instrument I described for smoking out the eye; do this many times, because it will stop without bleeding.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the way to do the smoking is to take a pot with burning charcoal in it, and place over it a lid with a hole in the middle, and put the end of the instrument into that hole; then smoke out the patient, and have the patient put their head in their mouth, and close their mouth so the smoke doesn't escape, but comes to the blood; and the blood will stop now, and if it doesn't stop, then repeat the smoking many times; and let the patient be thirsty, and eat salty and sour things, and don't drink water; and then it will come out through this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument with which one draws out the blood is, when one can see it, like curved tweezers so that they can enter the throat; and it has a shape like a surgeon's forceps, and it has roughness from limed iron, so that it cannot let go of what it grabs; and see here the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	There are many types of abscesses, according to what the memories that come later in this book from one and another, and they differ in penetration and size; and there are two kinds, one in its appearance itself, and in what it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second kind is because of the places where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and the abscesses of fleshy places are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in practice.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And in some abscesses one must not pierce until the bowels are cooled according to their completion; and there are others that one must pierce when they have become crusty, and they do not die according to their completion, like abscesses that are near joints.Et li apostemes qui sont en les joinctures de la char, si convient a percier quant il sont crut, et ne doivent mie tant que il soit meure; car li bowe n’est mie frois tant que il ne soit crut, ains est chauf et corant, si qu’il ne doit mie estre percier tant que il ne soit crut.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when an abscess occurs near the joints and is left until it becomes pus-filled around the edge, by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Or, if the abscess is near the principal limb and you delay piercing it until it becomes pus-filled, it will harm the principal limb. If it is near the fundament, one should pierce it so that it may drain; but one must not pierce an abscess without digestion being complete except for the one which is by the fundament, lest it fester inside and become elongated, and a fistula develop, taking a long time to heal.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And one should know the time of piercing an abscess that is mature according to its completion, which is when the pain subsides, the fever decreases, and there is a reduction in swelling, redness, discharge, and discomfort at the apex of the abscess, along with other signs. The piercing should be done at the highest point of the abscess, where there is movement and an opening; it should be pierced from the length of the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints affecting nerves and arteries, and in all similar locations without fold or crevice.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	These are bent according to the limb they affect.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to let the piercing wait until digestion is complete, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before that, the body will be harmed and filled with filth from it, and perhaps the lips and the depths of it will harden.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is an abscess that should be punctured according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you must treat small abscesses with small incisions; and large abscesses, large ones, and many incisions according to the appearance of their size; and for such abscesses where one should cut out the core, and cover it up: when they have become like pieces of cloth, and are deadened, then one must do as one does with blisters: and there are some with three angles, and some which one covers like the fuel of myrrh, that is, abscesses of the fingernails; and there are some where one makes a round incision, and other incisions, and similar coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who have no head, like a superficial boil, you must pierce it plainly; and when the boil is large and has drawn a great blister, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the blister in one hour, but some part of it; then stop the boil until the next day, then draw out something again; do this several times from great to small, until the blister is all out; likewise if the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman carrying a child, or a young child, or an old decrepit man.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the pus sometimes erupts with the blister, which may kill the patient without you realizing it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your boil, wash the wound, and look if the wound of the boil is small; and if it is a plain cut, apply tenters made of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large boil with many openings, you should place a tent in each opening so that they press against one another; and if you have cut into the boil a part of the skin, and you have pulled it back, then fill it with old dry cotton or rags of linen without moisture, and let it stay for three days; then remove it, and treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if you experience bleeding from your work, bring cold water and ease, and wet the cloth, and place it over the bleeding area many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding persists, bring management and treatment, and the powders that I have described earlier in this book; and if it is during winter, and the area is very nervous, then you should place wet tents and clothes soaked in warm wine and oil; and if it is in summer, and the area is fleshy, then you should place wet clothes soaked in water and oil, or in cool wine and oil, for a third of the day, as we have said; then loosen the abscess, wash and treat it, as it should be, until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how one must go before the treatment of abscesses, and see the chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	From the neck come small abscesses, and they are caused by lice that live in our clothing, just as the gnat does on a chicken, and there are many variations of them.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some with fat and such where there is moisture as well as pus; and there are others that are hard and stony in texture, and there is no doubt if the artery does not do otherwise.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the body is that you should test with all instruments called "catheters," from which the form comes afterwards, whatever it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, they draw it out from above.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is evacuated, they burn it without leaving anything behind that contains the moisture, for it returns as soon as one leaves it; then immerse cotton in Egyptian ointment if it is present; otherwise, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; those who remain overnight will be cured.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then begin the cotton again, as before, the second day and the third, until you are sure it does not hurt at night; then treat the wound with ointment appropriately, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess contains pus and fat, cut it according to this form, lengthwise; and pour out your nails, and scrape off all scabs from all parts, and put all your care into pulling out the arrow where he lies; and if an artery makes a sound against you, do what I told you after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also treat the abscess if it is stone-like, by cutting and curing as I told you.Car il adont que li maux par la cotte ne se puet guariir, s’il est trop grant ou trop longuement tenus; et si le mal te fait tuit a la cotte, et te trais et te guaris la cotte, et il ne veult demourer en sa place; adonc covient que tu remettes la cure d’icelle, et que tu luis donnes li repos de la cotte, si com je t’ai dit.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the incision on the pierreous abscess and moisture is lighter, because it contains little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if there is no moisture in any of these abscesses, either in the head or not, and this was the type of abscess that I incised in the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess just like a hard, rough, white stone, and couldn't be crushed; and if anyone had broken it, they would have made a wound just like a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming out of the head, except for those that come out at the head of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should be as low as possible so that the pus can flow out; and treat them as they should be.
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses come in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come elsewhere in the body, and are large, and are intertwined with each other.Et sont de poc de sang, et de poc de moiste, et fuient li moiste par la voinne que on leur ouit; et si ne le font, il fuient per les poins des chies, ou il sont venuz; et s’il ne fuient pas per li chief, il fuient per les autres poins.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly within its coat, as the knot and abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many similarities among these scrofulas.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and others that are malicious and do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	So in that one which you see is of good disposition to touch, and is similar in color to the body, and moves from each part and is not arouses the nerves of the neck or the artery or the conduit, and is not profound; so you must cup it from above, and scrape off each part, and are the two lips of the heart bent inward if you need, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and draw it little by little, and be sure that you do not cover the nerve or vein, and neither the spatumile nor the trenchant so that the hand does not slip, and do not look too far forward so that you do not cover what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you grasp the vein or artery and it does not let you work, then put powdered vitriol in the wound, or some powder that stops bleeding, and constrict the wound; and leave it until the abscess is eased, and the wound softened and begins to fester.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the bleeding is stopped, return to your task, until you have finished it; then seek out with your finger if any small scrofulae remain, and squeeze and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrofula, you must not squeeze that scrofula at its root, but ligature it with a strong double thread, and let it drop without harming; then treat the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut all around the scrofula, then you should bring together the two lips of the wound and stitch them now, since there is no longer any surplus due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	you should proceed to cut off its root and pull it out, then stitch it up as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofula which hold surplus, pierce where it appears to be dying; and pierce it thus as the one before is said, depending on it, then administer poultices with ointment and similar things so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is clean, then treat it with ointment smeared on a bandage until it heals.
de squinance	of squint
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the record of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those with squint, the flap of the throat, which is called the "epiglottis", should be cut; and one must not make an incision by this, because all the veins and the lung of the patient are affected by the heat of the abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both armpits.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the throat's canal, one must cover the epiglottis to avoid the loss that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we want to split the epiglottis, we should split it below three circles or four, a small split through both circles, or according to the amount of the split in the soft palate; and those places which are subject to the section of the epiglottis where there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long from there.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, then he should stretch the skin of the throat all the way to the Adam's apple, then split the skin until he reaches the gland; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then cut the sinus, as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the vein of the gland that jumps out through the place that is broken, and by the failure of the voice; and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed that we doubt strangulation, bring together the two lips of the heart wound, and cut all the way to the cartilage without damaging it; then administer remedies that promote scar tissue growth until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim says to do this only until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is judged dead, and the lack of breath.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then cut the epiglottis so that the patient cannot choke, and he will breathe through the wound, and thus be saved from death; and because of this the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease passed, and it passes in 3 or 4 days. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and treat it, once it was healed; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw a young maiden take a knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the veins in her neck; and I was called to heal her, and found her as good as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound and found that the blood which had issued from it, and I saw that she had not coughed up any blood or vomited anything except through her throat, and the blood was flowing out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened and sewed up the wound and healed her until she was cured; and the maiden had no more pain in her throat, and returned to her senses afterward; therefore I say that one should not fear cutting into the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This kind of abscess is called a "hernia in the throat," and it is a large abscess the color of a plum, and it occurs frequently in women; and there are two kinds: natural and accidental; the natural kind has no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental kind is of two kinds, one of which is similar to a cyst, and the other kind is like an abscess that comes from an artery; and there is doubt about it, and one should not operate with force except on those that are small, and test and examine all along the entrance: if you find it just like a cyst, and it cannot be removed in any way, then cut into it as one would cut into a cyst, and treat it throughout its entire length, if there is nothing inside; and examine thoroughly, and heal it as it should be healed.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways to approach this, and I will explain all their similarities; now I must describe the key difference between dislocation and issue.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that discharge is a persistent fever and heat until the swelling has passed, and the pus has been expelled; then the fever and heat will subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With a dislocation there is no heat or fever or pain; it contains pus, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a pimple and becomes swollen; and they appear in two ways, either dry or moist, and their colors are as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the ulcer, that you test and examine it first with all the instruments which are called "syringes", according to what its shape will allow in the chapter which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the method of inquiring into abscesses is to squeeze the most moist place that you find in the abscess, and move your fingers gradually, until you feel that the pus has broken through the skin, then according to the size of the abscess; then extract the probe, and be careful not to push anything back in.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the pus that flows is clear, whatever color it has, then treat it as I have said for other abscesses; and if after the probe no pus comes out, know that it is fatty, so treat it in a cross pattern, and take it with tweezers, and lightly scrape the skin around where it lies, drawing the pus out with the abscess; and if you cannot draw it all out at once, then treat it bit by bit so that nothing remains.Et se li sembles que li nout est gras et ne peut estre tiriez sain, si fent en la meseure de l’apostoime selonc son grandor; et li sens de li nouts est que s’il a grant dolor sur le corps ou il gist, si est gras, et s’il ne le veult demourer en un leu, si vait ains qu’il ne peut demourer en un leu, et se il adonc le gardait il morut; et ne se doit demourer lons temps, car li est grant danger.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if it stays, it will return to us many times; and if it remains for a little while, and the pain is not severe, apply some corrosive powders to the wound, bind it tightly, and put hot poultices on the abscess, treating the wound with other remedies until it heals; and if the nose is large, cut the two lips of the wound, and treat it with a remedy that encourages flesh growth.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein beneath is contrary to you or another, hasten and apply powdered vitriol, and let it remain for 2 or 3 days, until the wound suppurates and the blood flow ceases; then return to cover what has remained uncovered during this time.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See the forms of the trocar, which come in three varieties: large, medium, and small; and there are three types of these, called 'albaret', one called 'breb', and they also come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, to pierce abscesses; and they are like needles used to pierce sorcerers' marks, made from brass, iron, or silver, but the yellow ones are best, and are most often used with black pitch to pierce fistula. They come in three sizes depending on the width of the opening.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of warts are very varied, as you can see: large, medium, and small; and there are warts that have two curves in three ways; and there are warts with three curves, and they are also in three ways; and there are warts with two curves, and warts with only one curve, and they are in three ways; and all of these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The heads of these knives are sharp, and some only cut one side, so that the nerve or vein is not cut; and there are three types of such instruments: large, small, and medium, as you can see; and they are only used on fleshy parts, such as legs, arms, breasts, and fingers, and similar places; and sometimes a small instrument like a punch is made according to this form, with which blood is stopped.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and sometimes it is put into the place that heals by copious bleeding of veins and arteries; and sometimes they heal according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they become corrupt, resembling women's breasts; and they remain ugly and swollen, and those who want to cure them should follow this line from b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Scrape off the fat, and treat the wound with ointment, then sew up the two lips of the wound and heal it until it is clean; and if the breast sags and becomes soft due to its size, as happens to women, then make two slits on top, in the form of two similar incisions; so that one lip of the wound is sewn to the other at the end of each slit, ensuring that the larger line contains the smaller according to this shape, from line b to g; then scrape off the skin between the two lips, remove the fat, and apply what we have said about sewing and powders, and whatever else is necessary for healing, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not entirely done, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to bleeding, then you should fill the wound with damp cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it sucks up the remaining fluid and fat, then heal it until it is clean.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses which come from under the armpits are like hard scrofula nodules, and some contain pus.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus that is in the abscess has been drained, apply clean cotton to the wound and leave it until the next day; then remove the cotton and treat with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are like scrofula, they should be treated as we have said for scrofula fissures, and if the wound is closed, a cautery should be administered as mentioned earlier.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is swollen and the skin above it, this often causes abscesses, and the same happens to the vein, which becomes swollen and abscessed; and one can tell the cause is the artery when the abscess is long and deep; and when you touch it with your fingers, you feel a tugging; and when the cause is the vein, there are red spots apparent; and it is foolish to cover this kind of abscess, especially when it is under the armpits or around the anus, neck, or in many other places, and it is very serious.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore one must avoid cauterizing with iron, and also cut the one on top if it is due to a swollen artery; then open the vein at its base, and carefully separate the artery from the veins, so that it is exposed; then insert a needle underneath where there is an artery, and have it pierce through to the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two places according to how I taught you for the extraction of the two arteries in the temples; then stab the place between the two threads with an instrument, so that the blood within comes out which is causing the abscess; then administer the cautery which bends a bow, until the ligature comes undone; then treat it with ointment suitable to it, until it is healed; and if the abscess is due to opening a vein, then one must dye their hand with the pus from the abscess all over the skin, then insert another needle underneath where they are holding the hand, have it pierce through, and tie a double thread around it in three places; then lance the abscess so that the excess comes out, then lance the skin and leave what is tied; then place a moistened cloth in wine and oil on top of it, then administer treatments with poultices and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, as abscesses come in the artery and vein, so do they come to the nerves when they are hurt, or from too great exertion, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens most often in the shoulders and elbows and in all places where there are joints, and it is a grievous abscess, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in various dispositions without pain; and when one presses it firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not at the surface of the body but deep within; and it becomes numb in all parts, and it cannot go forward or backward, or downward or upward, and that which is in joints should not be covered with iron: for there might be contraction; and that which is on the head or forehead, treat with a poultice.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and pull out the root; if it is large, cut it open at the base, then scrape it, then remove the bone, and close the wound with stitches, then heal it completely.
des grosses boces pendans	of large dangling
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	There is a disease that sometimes affects the stomach and no other part; it is called "fungus" because of its resemblance to ears, having thin roots and thick stems. There are both small and very large ones. I saw a man who had two on his stomach that looked more like fungi than anything else, without any difference, white in color, with slender roots, and split open, from which moisture would leak out.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I cut them out and found one weighing 18 ounces and the other 6 ounces; their treatment is to incise and look if the disease is moist, and the color of the skin is white and moist with slender roots. Then cut with a wide spatula and apply fire cautery in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For when cutting, there are often large blood vessels that need to be cauterized immediately, and if the patient is frightened of the incision with the iron, take a well-prepared piece of linen thread and tie it around the skin as described, and leave it for two days; then tie it tightly, and do not stop tightening the thread until the skin is cut through, and if the roots are large, one must be cautious about cutting in the same way for the stomach, but you can certainly cut half of it, then cauterize it so that it does not return, then treat the wound and take care not to cut into the skin that is a pale color and has poor sensation and looks like milk.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of ulcers next.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil has broken
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the boil comes from cautery on a wound or from a fissure in the syphilitic sore, and it is on the belly and in some of the bowels, as happens in other roux, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from flatulence; and if it is by the roux of the syphilitic sore and by the discharge of the bowel, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a slight thing without pain, and there are various discharges.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when pressed by hand it springs back, and sometimes it retreats, and if constricted, it grows larger at the entrance of the bath and from great exertion.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a slight thing, and it opens easily when you press it with your hand, and it does not constrict; and if it is due to blood, then the abscesses are large and hard, and they are fixed according to a quantity; and if it is due to flatulence, then it is soft to the touch, and the action is that you should look to see whether the appearance is due to blood from an artery or vein, or flatulence.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you must let the wound heal.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, because of the artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is in the intestine or bowels, then you must command the patient to tighten his belt and be stretched out straight, then sign all around the swollen area; then command him to lie still between your hands, then go around the area that you have marked all around the spasm, then extend half of the abscess upwards to the large knuckle; then tie it tightly around with a strong thread or a strong silk cord, and let the patient's nose be free; then open half of the abscess over the string, and put your finger inside, and feel for the intestine; if you find it caught in the string, then release it, and pull out the intestine from the abdomen; and if you find the bowels, grab them at the knuckle and cut off the excess; and if the artery or vein makes a noise, walk gently all around, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two strong threads through them, and pierce what you have made in the form of a cross; then pull out the abscess in four places on the needles, and if you see any, remove the needles, and let the place heal as it can, and cut away the dead flesh by itself; or when it becomes subtle and heals, then cure it as appropriate, and draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the wound appropriately, and close up the wound.
dou chancre	from sores [ulcers]
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have discussed the different types of sores [ulcers] and how to treat them with medication, including the use of cauterization with iron. We have also mentioned sores that appear in the mouth, and how to care for them. The ancients say that when sores are in places where they can be reached, such as in the breasts or thighs, and similar areas, they should be removed completely when they are new. However, once they become large and old, one should not touch them, as I have never seen anyone heal from them; nor has anyone healed from them before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the work, when it is in place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you sometimes purge the patient of black bile; then make him bleed if he has a manifest fullness, then prepare the patient .i. good site for the operation; then cut your onchites or ulcer, and the hair all over, and the bone all over without leaving anything; and let the blood run out completely, and express the site well with your hand or something, and if the bleeding from the incision of the artery or vein makes you feel contrary, cauterize it until the blood vessels are stunned; then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already described in the section on diagnosis the appearances of dropsy, how the accumulation of fluid occurs, the signs of each type, and the treatment using medication or iron. Only two types, tympanites and hydrops, should be treated with iron; these are deadly conditions. So, when treating a case of dropsy called 'eclites' with medication, and the treatment is ineffective, consider whether the patient is weak, or suffering from another ailment besides dropsy, such as stomach issues and similar conditions; in which case, do not use iron, as there is a risk involved. But if the patient is strong, and suffering only from dropsy, and neither too young nor too old, then proceed as follows: support the patient upright in your arms, and press on the abdomen to force the fluid down to the lowest part of the feet. Then, take the spiny spatula and insert it according to this procedure:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let there be two parts of a trenchant.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And it should be pointed at both ends, but not so sharp that it can pierce the intestines when inserted, nor can it blister; then look to see if the dropsy is in the intestines. If it is due to liver disease, the incision should be on the left side of the navel; and if it is due to the spleen, it should be on the right. It is not good for the patient to lie on the incision so that the excess fluids do not flow into the weak area; then pierce all the way through the skin with the instrument, and squeeze out the fluid, and lift your hand slightly above the spatumile between the skin and the syphon as though skinning it to the thickness of a fingernail or nail clippings. Then pierce the syphon until the fluid comes out at the desired location; that is where the water is located. Then draw it out, and insert this instrument from which the fluid will be withdrawn.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a silver cane, and is made of lightweight bronze or brass, and has a small hole in the lower part; and on one side there are three holes, and two on the other, and one on the other; and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes make when cutting a quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	at the top of the instrument is a spout, so that when you tilt it, the liquid flows out; therefore empty half or one-third of it, for if you empty more than is appropriate in that hour, the patient may die from the shock to his spirit due to the instrument, or he may faint, or he will be close to death; but empty according to the quantity of his strength and according to what the dispositions of his strength signify, and his pulses; then withdraw the instrument and retain the liquid, which is now retained by the stopper that blocks the hole in the syphac, about which I have spoken, and which you should pierce according to this method; then reinsert the instrument the next day if you see the patient can endure it, and draw out a small quantity of liquid; do this every day, and beware of overdoing it as long as some liquid remains.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	If you have doubts about the illness, leave it with a lot of water, and treat it with hot sand or ash, and with much sweating or bathing and in the sun, and if it changes color from drinking; and treat it with medicines that dry up wounds until it is healed, and cauterize the stomach and liver and spleen after the extraction of the fluid, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stoppage of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born without a foreskin, or with a small foreskin, or with it in the wrong place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If necessary, pierce it immediately with a very thin and sharp spike according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then put in the foreskin a subtle plug of lead, and tie it, and leave it thus for 3 or 4 days, and when he wants to urinate, remove the plug, and he will urinate, and then replace it; and perhaps it is not necessary at all, because the fluid that comes out pushes the foreskin open.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those whose opening is small, if they are medicated with the plaster of lead white, as we have said, will open up.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the opening in their place are bloated, for some are born with the opening at the head of the penis, which prevents them from urinating before they lift their penis upwards; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot reach the urethra, and this is a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the way to treat it is for the patient to lie on his back, then the head and shaft of the penis are pulled up like a feather, as far as it will go; and take care to prevent bleeding which often occurs, and if it does happen, then stop the flow with that which stops blood flow, and cure the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of pustules on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these whitlows come on the penis, and it is an ugly appearance of flesh; and there are harmful and harmless ones; therefore you should squeeze them gently with a pair of tweezers, and pull out the roots, then clean and dry them, then apply cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then cure it with тонконгоном until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, putrid and discolored, then you must apply cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cut it, and if the ulcer is on the shaft of the penis, and part of it is inside and part outside, then you must first remove the ulcer that is inside; and when it is healed, treat the one outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because when you treat it together, if the glans of the penis is not protected so that it is not pierced, and blackness and corruption come to it in its glans and scrotum; then cut off all that is black and corrupted, then bind on the ointment of honey and flour made from pomegranate rinds and walnuts, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if there is bleeding, administer the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauteries help in two ways together: that is, in bleeding and corruption; and if the glans of the penis is infected and drawn, then you must boil or conduct water through the shaft of the penis, and the patient must urinate among it; and when the foreskin is tight at the tip of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, either due to a wound or an abscess, then you must cut it with an instrument, so that the membrane is loosened and the glans of the penis is freed from all sides; and if it is a painful thing to discuss this, then you should cut it with a spatula made of wood at the tip of the penis and around the foreskin; then open gently between them, and put a thin damp linen cloth in cold water over it so that it does not swell again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not dismemberment of continuation like the other wounds; nevertheless, when we do this work of our own will and properly on children, it is necessary for us to do the best work, and the lightest for salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not tell of their children's circumcision because they did not use it in their law, and we have nothing on this subject except what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the greater part of masters and doctors who performed circumcision around the glans, and on strong ones, and on all a new foreskin; so the foreskin shrinks because there are two membranes, and by chance one grows above and the other below remains.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Then they heal, and the pain is doubled, and in the healing which is from the nail there is no certainty that the point of the member is healed; and in the healing of the nail sometimes the iron slips away, and they ruin the work, and many times they heal in such a way that they do not need to be healed, and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the healing that is done with strength throughout all the thread of the wound I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut justly above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because when you press your hand, you cut it evenly all around; but the thread must be tightly wound around the skin; and the method of the first operation is that you make the child think that you are only tying the thread around the wand, and then you make him pull it in every way you can; then you hold it straight between your hands, and press your fingers or the soles of your feet against your hands so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the wand and breathe on the wound, and draw it up so that the head of the wand is in; then clean it well from the filth that has gathered there, then tie the place with a double thread, and then tie it under the other end; and hold it by both ends by the second ligature to the pouch and the index finger, and press between the two threads, then lift the wound gently and draw out the head of the wand; then let the blood run little by little, for that is the wound; and put powder on top of the powder a cloth glued with an egg cooked in rosewater, confited with good fresh rosemary oil, and leave it on until the next day, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the force for purification is as follows: the two knees should be relaxed and straight, and the hands should be as large as the forearm equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of purification is when the wound inside bleeds; therefore, you should stretch it with your fingernail, so that the blood makes an abscess; then, press it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, hold it with tweezers, and then press.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it bleeds for three days, and what is under the skin is swollen, let it be until the abscess is healed and the wound slightly scarred; then press as much as you can, and beware of the part of the penis, it will not harm him in any way.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Thus treat the site of sudden wounds with powder, as we said in the treatise on powders, and if it bleeds profusely and goes above, it will do no harm; therefore treat it, as we said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	retaining urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retenetion of urine is due to a stone, or frozen blood, or bowels, or Char nee, or similar things that we have mentioned in the division; and if the urine is not released, and you see the retenetion is caused by the stone which is lodged at the neck of the bladder, then the patient should bend forward onto his knees; and his feet should be placed on his back, and he should stretch his abdomen from above the back, and hold himself in that position as much as he can; and thus the neck of the bladder is forced upwards to expel the stone, which will release the urine. If it does not come out as we have described, and the patient feels great pain, then you should administer extraction using an instrument called a "syringe", of which this is the form: it should be made of thin silver, as light as a bird's feather; its tube should be half a palm long, and thin at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the way to release the urine is that you take a double thread and tie it to the tip of some wool or cotton, and insert the tip of the thread into the syringe; and squeeze out the excess wool and push it all the way to the tip of the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and have the patient sit on a chair, and lubricate his penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water; then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the body; then fill the syringe all the way to the bladder, and feel the patient's bladder being emptied, and if this is not done in this order, it will be because the person guiding it has done it incorrectly; then pull out the thread through the wool, and let the urine flow along the wool, then remove the thread, and release the urine; and repeat with the syringe until the bladder is empty and the patient feels relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When blood or scabs appear in the bladder, and pus has gathered there, and you see water and medicine dripping, then use all the apparatus called a “clepsydra”, and that is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed and has three openings: two on one side and one on the other, as you see; and the hair-like vessels through which the medicine reaches the penis are such that it blocks the penis without addition, so that if moisture can be drawn out and pushed in when necessary; and when you see your medicines leaking into the bladder, place the tip of the catheter into the moisture and draw it along the tract that is there; then you will draw the moisture to the catheter, and then push the tract inside firmly; then the moisture will enter inside, and will reach the bladder immediately, so that the patient feels it; and this is the form of the subtle catheter with which one catheters the bladder: thus it is.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is made of silver or bronze, and the head is highest; and below there is one testicle or two; then take a bladder of a lamb and put the moisture that you see fit to catheterize the bladder, then tie it between the two testicles formed from a thin double thread, and heat this moisture over fire; then insert the tip of the catheter into the penis, then press your hand on the bladder gently until all the moisture enters, so that the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder; and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle, and pierce it all around with a needle; then insert the thread tightly into these openings, then assemble the circle as one assembles a ball, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, by pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	of stones
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already discussed in the division the methods of stones, and their extraction along with medicines; and I have described the difference between stones formed in the kidneys, and all the signs, and on which type of stone one should operate by cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will explain it clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is formed in the bladder occurs more frequently in children, and it is a sign that the water flows from the bladder similar to water in its subtlety; and it appears as a vein, and the patient feels pain in his penis, and he can urinate many times, and then it swells; and most of these have stones at the bottom; and the treatment is easier for those who have large stones than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to draw out all the feces which are in the bowels.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it sometimes clogs up the search for stones.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and lift him up and move him around, so that the stone descends into the bladder, and sometimes comes out from above; then let him sit between your hands, and his hands be underneath his thighs, so that the bladder is completely tilted downward; then probe and touch inside; if you feel a stone in the space, then hurry now to cut into it.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not come out with the touch, then moisten your index finger of your left hand with oil, if the patient is old, or your middle finger, if the patient is a young man; and insert it into his anus, and probe for the stone, and when you feel it at your finger, draw it toward the neck of the bladder; then press with your finger, and push it out to where you plan to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and instruct the patient to extend his testicles upwards in his right hand, and with his left hand pull back the skin under the testicles in the area where the incision is made; then insert the spatulum tightly, following its natural shape.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And they make it between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the side of the left buttock; and let him be straight on the stone, and his toes be on the anus, and let the incision be diagonal so that it is wide at the top and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large; sometimes it presses the toe which is on the anus, so that it jumps out without effort; and know that there is a kind of stone with angles and edges: it is difficult to remove. And there is a kind that is underneath, similar to a gland, round, whose output is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And for those with angles and edges, make the incision larger; and if it does not jump out, you must pull it with tweezers which are like a file at the tip, to extract the stone so that it does not escape; or you insert an instrument under it, with a curved tip. And if you cannot grip it in this way, then enlarge the opening, and if the blood vessels rupture, then constrict with vitriol; and if there is more than one stone, then first insert the largest at the neck of the bladder, then push up from below, then pull the rest out, and the smaller ones after.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then it must be sewn up, and a larger wound made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either they die or their urine comes out through the wound that cannot heal; but nevertheless, try to pull it with forceps until you have torn it in pieces; and when you have finished your work, smear the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and constrict it, and place over it a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then re-bind the patient's neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, then wash the area very well with oil and water, then treat the wound with thin ointment and thick ointment, until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if hot abscesses and corrosions come in the wound, and congealing of blood in the bladder, and the urine is retained because of it, which happens in such a way that there is pain with the urination: then thrust your finger into the wound and draw out that blood, for if it remains there, it will corrupt the bladder and burst; then wash the wound with water and vinegar and salt, and help him in every way you know until he is healed; and it is necessary that whenever you treat it, to bind his two thighs together, and assemble the remedies over the affected area.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small and lodged in the urethra, causing it to be blocked, and the urine cannot pass; then the treatment of what I have said before serves as an excuse for cutting, and one should cut many times through this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proven this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	And if it is the size of a walnut or an egg, and it is in the entrance to the stomach, so that it cannot pass through the passage; take a piece of iron according to this shape and have 3 angles fixed on a stick:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then insert the probe gently into the penis until it reaches the stone; and turn the probe in your hand inside the stone, little by little, until you pierce the stone from another side; then urine will come out at once, then press your hand on what is left of the stone that is inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is broken at once and comes out with the urine, then the patient is healed; but if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie a thread under the stone and another above it, then pull the penis towards the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and untie the string, and clean the congealed blood in the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of female stones
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It sometimes happens that a stone becomes stuck in women, and if it does, the cure is painful, and it is forbidden for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a skilled woman who reveals herself to midwives, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman well skilled in this art of medicine; and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman is more embedded than the stone of a man, so it must be cut deeper, and there is greater fear involved. And if necessity demands it, one should take a midwife who is very skilled, and with difficulty she will find it, and if you cannot find one, then use a very subtle cast; and show her a wise dance in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command from the examination of the stone; and look very carefully to see if the woman is a virgin. Then she should push her finger into the urethra and seek the stone; and if she finds it, then she should press it under her finger, and recommend that she pushes her finger or thumb into the wound and wants and presses her left hand on the bladder firmly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, she should move it from the bladder up to the root of the thigh; then press on the stone in the root of the thigh towards the middle of the hip, where the movement is felt, and feel for the stone in that area; do not move the finger above or below the stone, and make the incision small at first. Then enlarge the wound as much as needed so that you can feel the stone, and know that there are many types of stones: some are small and smooth, others large and rough, long and round, and some have a rainy texture.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	you will know their appearance to identify the exit point.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood flows, put powdered vitriol on the spot and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your work and remove the stone with the tools I told you about earlier; have assistants to help you in this task. If the blood flows and it is from an artery that has been cut, apply the powder to the wound and press it firmly with bandages and a tourniquet; do not try to pull out the stone, as the patient may bleed to death; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the swelling has gone down, return to your task until the stone is out.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Ramice aquouse is nothing other than the gathering of moisture or white pus, which is located under the membrane of the testicles, which holds the egg; and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one believes that there is another egg; and this occurs when the skin of the testicle between the white pus that we have mentioned.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramice is due to weakness that comes to the testicles, and that matter is spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a yellowish color, or red, or black, or watery white, and so on; and these are the signs by which one can recognize this condition, for if it is in the white syphilis that we have mentioned, then the abscesses are like an egg, and there is no opening to the testicles, because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the skin itself, then the abscesses are like an egg with a part of an onion, and so one thinks it is another onion; and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white syphilis, then he feels good; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, test all over the area where the shape is described above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, then judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with fire, the patient must be healed according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then he should lie on his back on something slightly raised, and have a lot of covering below him; then he should sit up on his left side, and direct the assistant to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs of the heart; then take the spatulum gently, and cut the skin of the ribs among them in their length from above the nipple, and let the slit be straight while dividing the skin of the ribs up to the white skin, and peel it subtly according to his strength; then pierce the skin fully with water at a large hole, and draw out all the water, and then put your fingers in, and raise the skin upwards; and do not touch the heart itself, only the skin; cut everything equally in pieces, including the ribs, and do so subtly, or the water will return; if the wound jumps out of place during your work, reset it in its place when you have finished the work on the skin; then unite the two edges of the skin of the ribs with a single stitch, then cure it like other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the wound corrupted by another disease, then you should ligature the vessels that are suspended, fearing the flow of blood; then cut the skin all around the suspended area, extract the wound, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the vein is divided into two parts together, know that they are two branches; then compress the other part as you did the first equally, then wash off the blood, and put in the wound soft lamb's wool moistened with rose oil; and put on another soft lamb's wool moistened with wine and oil, and put it over the two branches, and place doubled linen cloth on top, and tie it around all of the area which follows this pattern:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two pieces of linen and stuff them with lamb's wool according to this appearance, and let them be sewn together at the crotch of the breeches, and one of the heads pressed against the anus to the back, and the other head over the perineum; and let the other two heads be on the two branches, and let all the binding be tied in the loop of the breeches; and sometimes this branch is treated with cautery instead of cutting with iron, and it is that you press a thin silver knife against the skin of the branches, and when the white pus containing the blood is revealed, take the knife according to this shape, and pierce that syphilis at the joints, and scorch it with this thin hot knife:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And cut in every way you can, as long as you remove everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is safer; and move, watching for blood flow, and changes in the incision; and if nothing contradicts you, whether an abscess or blood flow or anything else, then cure what contradicts you, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this treatment due to its horror, then administer perforation as I have told you; and when you are certain through the signs that we have mentioned, that the pus is drained, then have the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess at the bottom to the full breadth of the spatumile, and insert the perforation deep into the body; make the holes wide so that all the fluid can flow out; then place cotton over the wound and bandage it, and let the remaining fluid drain away, then treat the wound until it is healed; and if the white membrane does not allow the fluid to exit through the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a feather or the instrument used to treat hydrops, of which the shape has been described earlier; open the wound wider, and know that the fluid will return and be reabsorbed after six months or so, and when it is reabsorbed as before, the patient will recover.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the dissection of this nerve there are many dispositions of fear, because of which it seems better to leave it alone; and I will tell you about its operation and the appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I therefore say that many abscesses come about in the body, especially in the testes; and this happens in many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to be known through the overflow of bile and phlegm, which are spread throughout the body, or through impact; and the color of the abscess follows the color of the body; and there is no pain, and it is a serious abscess; and sometimes there are painful, pierceable abscesses, with a pus-like color, and at other times it comes from an artery, or from the inflammation of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from an artery, it is known by the hot disposition of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and you must not touch it.Quant c’est par enfleure de voine, si est conus quant li voinses soun tans et gonfliez, ou si tu le vès a la figure de l’aposteme selonc la disposition de la voinne; et si tu le presseres, li voinses soun tendus.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Those who are affected by inflammation of the vein are identified by their appearance and the sensation when touched with the fingers; one can then properly make an incision on this appearance and other similar ones; you should cut the surface of the testicles, then the egg will be on top, and the white string will come out from under the egg, freeing the suspensory ligament in all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already rotten with these new characters, then you should therefore cut the egg and slice it; and if there is air in the scrotum or in what is inside the vessels, then one must free all those tendons and cut them roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the swelling is in the rear location, then you must cup it all and extract the testicle, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is finished, then cover the wound with soft wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is a swelling wrapped in a wrapper similar to an onion, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient suffers greatly when he urinates; and the cure for this disease is also good, as fearful as it is, and we will nevertheless tell you how to treat it according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary for you to make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then tie the suspensory band of the testicles tightly with your fingers, around all the vessels near the penis, and stretch them firmly; then cut through the vessels with a sharp spatula, widely and straight across their path, so that they are exposed, and then scrape each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries in the temples; then insert a needle where there is a double thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein appeared, and then directly to the other end; then pull them gently according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisture; then treat the wound as with the others, where a bowstring may be inserted so that any vessel which is not tied off can be tied off; for this does no harm, and if all the vessels are tied off, it is necessary to pull on the testicles at all the vessels, so that the urethra does not lose its supply of blood due to the incision of the vessels, and they do not become dry and unable to heal.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rupture of the sinus
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The cause of this hernia is either through the incision that leads to the scrotum, or from an extension on the abdomen in the area of the groins, causing the intestines to descend from this opening to one of the testicles; and this opening is located in the scrotum, or from its extension, and these two types of hernias arise from many causes: from a blow, or from jumping, or from straining, or from lifting a heavy load, and from similar actions. The sign that it is an extension of the scrotum is that it occurs gradually over a long time and does not happen suddenly; and the hernia is even all the way to the bottom, because the scrotum presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are that it is of the section of the syphilis, that it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and there are various abscesses appearing beneath the skin, close to the surface, and this is due to the escape of the intestines and the body from the syphilis.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines descend with the feces, and are held back, causing great pain to the patient, especially when they are pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments of iron, there is fear, because of which one should abstain.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the way to treat it is to instruct the patient to pull the intestine back into the wound with his hand if he can; then hold the scrotum between your hands and lift the testicles; then the anus will be on top, and grab all the skin of the testicles from the long side; then insert the knife tips into the groove of the incision according to what you need in order to open the wound, so that the blood can flow out; then scrape the scrotum under the skin of the testicles until the white tough scrotum is exposed on all sides; then put your index finger into the one that follows the testicle, between the white scrotum which is under the skin of the testicle and between the second scrotum, and separate what is behind the testicle and between the second scrotum; and move your right hand into the scrotum, and hold the white scrotum in your left hand, lifting the testicle up towards the anus; then have the assistant lift the testicle up, and loosen what is under the ligature at the back; and feel with your fingers if there is any intestine wrapped in the tough white scrotum, and if you find anything, put it back into the abdomen; then take a needle with a thick thread made of 10 threads, and insert it into the back part of the scrotum, which is after the skin of the testicles; after the incision, then grab the heads of the threads, so that there are 4 threads; then tie them together one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the scrotum with a strong ligature in two parts, so that none of the blood vessels that nourish it can enter, otherwise an abscess will form there; then put the ligature back according to the first long ligature, 2 fingers from that one, and after these two leave the scrotum which is under the skin of the testicles with a large portion of the ligature; and after all this, grab the part which is under the skin of the testicles, so that the blood flows, as we have said before; then apply soft wool soaked in oil to the wounds, and apply the ligature which we have described.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white syphilis that we have described is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of bloodletting.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens many times, and leave the ligature in place until it cuts through; and if it is slow to fall off, then use a hot water fomentation, and apply what we have said above, until it cuts through; then heal the wound with another healing method, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is made like the thread which is twisted together with the vis, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after cutting them slightly above and below; then cut them in the middle, and treat the abscess with what we have described, until the vessels are cut through; then heal it as we have said, until it is perfectly healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes the anus is torn apart, as we have said, and it opens up; but no intestines slip out, and if any do, they quickly go back in; and even if he stays in that position for too long, a fistula forms where the intestines are torn, as we have said, because they are stretched and then become soft and swollen; and this is treated with cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is treated by cutting into the anus in the following manner: the patient lies on his back between your knees, and you cut around the edge of the fistula according to its size, about three finger widths wide; then you pull out the fistula which is under the skin, and you press down on the abdomen, and then you cut the two visible openings of the fistula on the anus, and cut them both; then you pull out the head of the fistula, and do not cover up the opening or stretch it open with anything, as I have told you before in the treatment for tears in the intestines; then heal it using the healing method for wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, clean and treat the wound until it heals.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	Syrup is constricting and has no appearance in a hernia, and cauterization is beneficial in this case, and closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the scrotum
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the testicles becomes soft in some men, because the parts within are softened, and it appears milky white; and when one wishes to treat it, he should have the patient lie on his back, and cut away the skin which is softened above the natural skin; then bring together the two lips with a single stitch, and if you see fit, sew the superfluous soft skin with three or four stitches firmly; then cut between the stitches, and treat it as other wounds until it is healed, and remove the thread.
dou chastrement	of castration
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	You should know that castration is forbidden in our law, and for this reason I would prefer not to discuss it in this book. It is only necessary for two reasons: the first is so that doctors can answer questions about it and know how to perform the procedure; the second is because we often need to castrate certain animals to help us, such as bulls, rams, and pigs and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that castration is performed in two ways: by pulling or by cutting.Li chastremens por atraction est quanque li mires tire le membr’adessus la lande et qu’il le frotte sus li testiculi, si que il se descende; et tant com il le descende, il le tret adissous la lande et adessous les testiculi, et li mires le tret sus la lande et adessus les testiculi; et tant com il tire et frotte, li membr’adessus la lande se desce.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the one we do by traction, let us sit the animal in warm water until its joints are softened and relaxed; then squeeze them with your hand until they are reset and you feel no more pain.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Of castration of the testicles: you should dye the animal and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand, then tie the scrotum, and cup each testicle with your hand as you squeeze it, once you have squeezed them well; and leave some fat of the testicles and the fine fat that is under the vessels; and this type of castration is better than that which is done by traction, because in traction something from the testicles may remain, causing the animal to desire lust; then cure the wound until it heals.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways in men: one is that between the two testicles there appears something like the form of nature of a woman, having hair, and sometimes it urinated through it.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is in women, and has over the finger as a wand and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment of men and women is also to cut off the foreskin all around, and treat it as any other wound; in the second manner, for men whose urine drips from the skin of the testicles, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	of the testicles
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	A 'tentigen' is an aberration on the skin, so disfigured that it is horrible to look at; some women have them as large as a hand, and this is the treatment for them.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	You should dye the excess of the tentigen on your hand or with tweezers, and gently pluck it; do not go too deep so that there is no bleeding, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed; also for a growth that occurs in the mouth, use cow's milk, and perhaps it will disappear, and it is similar in appearance to a mole, and because of this they called it the 'cow disease'.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you need to treat it, as we have said about the tendon, and heal it until it is cured.
de erratique	of Errata
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	If it is errant, when the nature of the woman is not understood, or the opening is small; and it is natural from birth, or an accident from illness that came to it; or it is from a wound made by a sharp object or a thick one, and it is made deep in the belly, or on the sides, or underneath, or wherever; and they should understand conception and childbirth, and by chance the flowers to come; and the knowledge of this is through observing the dance.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the sores are nearly healed, then you can use your fingers or a stick.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is from a sharp object and it is close to the lips, then you should do this: place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then form the lips, so that the sharp object can be pushed out, and cover the sores; then take wool, soak it in oil, and place it on the wound, and have the woman lie at home every day so that it may not close up.Si est dou syfac espés, et li estoupemens est prochiens, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the ulcer is hard and thick, then you must cut it with a spatulum resembling a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the discharge is bloody, then dry it and cut it; and have blood-stopping medicines like acacia, dragon's blood, incense, and egg white; then apply a broad piece of pitch so that the wound does not heal; and let it be for a long time, and apply a tent of dry linen; then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when there is a bloody discharge in the eye, it must be cut in this way, unless it is an abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For in the abscess that is in the eye, one should not touch it with fire.
des emorroides	of Hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that discharge blood without usual cause, and when hemorrhoids are old they become thorny; and we have already said in the division their appearances, signs, and I will say here those that receive cure.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and thistles, when they are deep in the anus and do not appear to the touch, are not cured by fire.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those which are at the mouth of the anus, one can feel, they are those that one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, you should put the woman in a cold room, then burn the hemorrhoids with tweezers and pull out the roots, then powder it with medicines that stop bleeding, such as myrrh and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then bandage her feet to the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if there is any bleeding, she should sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and gallnuts and similar things, and then take barley flour, boil it with honey and garlic, and use it as a poultice on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it is stopped, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, make him breathe in bellows on the back and on the breasts without piercing; then take linen, soak it in plantain juice or dogwood juice with old wine, and apply it to the affected area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has drained, treat the wound with ointment until it heals; and that which is called "albathir" is red and looks like rough leather, so cover it as I have said before; then treat it until it heals.Et se il estainche, c’est boin.
des apostemes de la marris	Here is the translation of the next sentence:
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	There are many types of abscess that come from the sea, such as ulcers, pustules, herpes, eschar, and hemorrhoids, as well as hot abscesses, and several other diseases which I have mentioned in the division.Et se il estainche, c’est boin.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary that I describe in this treatise the hot abscess which occurs in the mare, which is not among the abscesses that collect in the bowels; and if you wish to know how it is treated with iron, observe whether the abscess is hard at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and whether it turns red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	So do not be hasty in piercing, but let it bleed until the pain is relieved; and then have the patient sit on a chair, with two small chairs to lean on, and support his back and rest his feet against the ends of his legs; and let his buttocks be spread apart, and place his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a cord; then suck the bag towards the right side, and administer the instrument through which the mouth of the mare is opened, from which the form [of the instrument] comes; and it is necessary that when you see this instrument administered, you insert the rod first to know the depth of the wound so that what goes into the instrument does not go deeper than it should and hurt the patient; and if the instrument is larger, cover the depth of the wound with cloth so that the instrument does not cause pain; and it is necessary that he place the funnel of the instrument on top and hold the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscesses open and they are made on the soft hand, then it is necessary to cover the head with a bandage; and when the bowels are evacuated, then you must put in the wound moist tents in rose oil, or in dry green oil; and put the tent out of the wound at the bottom of the injury, and put a poultice over the injury and over the clean linen wound with moist malva flowers or cooked aristolochia leaves; then cure it after two days of ointment, until it is healed; and sometimes raise the injury and the wound by a clyster of water and honey, and then with water or cooked lilies and aristolochia leaves; then return to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is returned to the injury, then you must guard against cooking with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	It is important for the midwife to first understand the natural process of childbirth and its signs: when you see the woman pushing downward and desiring to smell aromatics, then the child hastens to come out; thus you know that this childbirth follows the natural course, and the placenta comes out with the child, and the mother's excess fluids are expelled through good cleansing. But if it comes in any other way, then it is not natural.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For sometimes the child comes out feet-first, or head-first, or by the arms or from the chest or abdomen; it may also emerge from the side or be turned upside down in some other bad position. Thus the midwife must be wise and cunning in such matters, and beware of errors and deceptions, and I shall show you all the positions and how to assist them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out on its head by natural delivery, and the woman gives birth painfully, and her strength is weak, then make her sit on a chair or have women hold her; and give the midwife a small sponge soaked in rose oil or fried fenugreek between her fingers, and then insert it into the child's mouth:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And cut the amnion, and press her nail until the moisture that is within flows out; and press the belly of the woman so that the child comes down, and if it does not come down, then one should cleanse the woman with a poultice of fenugreek with oil of asses' milk; then make her press and sneeze with incense, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: then the child will now come out.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if both hands come out, then you should gently reset them little by little; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a chair, and lift her feet upward; then stand the chair on the ground, and press on the woman so that she does not strain while standing up; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child is dead, then grip the hands with the knife that was mentioned earlier, and extract the child, and reset them in the same way.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the issue of the child upon his feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes out onto his feet, he should be pushed upwards; and then he is turned slowly, until he is straight; then grab him by the feet and extend him slowly.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	When he jumps up to his hips, instruct him to grab hold, and make him sneeze forcefully; if he jumps out, God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump out as we have said, then pull it back little by little, until it is in its natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it will be easy.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if he does not come out as we have described, take the mallow plant and boil it in oil of sesame seed, and crush the gum into it; and put this ointment onto the woman's nature inside, then make her sit in warm water up to her ribs; and when she is softened beneath, place a bandage of myrrh on her, and leave it there for an hour; then make her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and constrict her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child will come out now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	for the child to come out onto his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this way, then put your hand gently on his head; then lie him on his back and let his legs hang down, and let him lie on his side; and fold his hands gently, and then press his hands on his belly, and lift up the cushions underneath, so that he is lying on his side; and if the child does not cry out, then take his feet and move them gently, then move his belly upwards, then put your hand in; and rock the child gently; and command the woman to hold on until the child emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the child's exit, which comes out wide a hand's breadth
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I will describe how to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, then have the woman stand up and walk around; if she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed and raise her legs gently; then administer the musk-moss that I described; and if she does not give birth, then have her sit on a chair, then try to bring back the hand; and rock the child according to nature, and make her sneeze, and command her to hold on until the child emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the emerging of the child onto its neck, and spread out his hands, and turn his face towards his mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is necessary for the surgeon to dye his hand, then turn it slowly and gently; and when it is even, he should apply a poultice of mustard and oil, as we have said, then instruct her to move it slowly; and when you have done this, make her sit on a chair, and instruct her to grip something; and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same way for all of the secondine
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes out in this way all over the body, then scrape away the scabs with your fingernail until the moisture is exhausted; and if the infant hangs on her face and neck, scrape him off, so that he is not retained and dies; then put the child back inside, so that you have placed him as he should be, and instruct the woman to grip something a few times: then let go gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes triplets or quadruplets; and this is not a strange thing, but happens rarely.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	They are strange things and do not live if they are not named. I know that they are multiplied and separated by the syrup that divides them, which is bound to the jar. Sometimes they emerge as naturally as a tail, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they emerge quickly, the treatment as we have said, and the doctor skilled, and do quickly and skillfully what she does, and act according to how it benefits health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the sea one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and all of them are shaped like children according to the measurement of the glorious sage, and it is necessary for the doctor to know this because sometimes similar things happen; then act according to what is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat a woman for a dead child or womb, as I have said in the division, and there is no movement, and you are forced to use your hands, it is necessary that you know whether the woman has good health and is not afraid of death; then the woman should lie on her back with her head inclined downward and her legs raised. The doctor should apply the ointment to both parts as she performs the massage, either lying in bed so that she is not moved while delivering the child, or on a table if it is easier to deliver the child. Then, rub the mouth of the sea with moist oils infused with myrrh and fenugreek and flax seed; then, the doctor should anoint their hands with these oils and apply the myrrh, then insert the fingers gently into the sea, then massage the place where it is expected to emerge, and watch if the child appears ready to slide down onto the head; then insert the fingers into the eyes, nose, mouth, throat, or armpits, and if delivery is from the feet, insert them at the heels and under the knees. It is necessary to anoint the right hand with the ointment and place the palm between their left thumb and forefinger, then gently massage the whole hand, and insert a finger in any of the places we have mentioned, as long as it comes to the empty space; and this is the shape of the finger:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	then pierce against the other nail, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions are even; and then they are made even by moving from one side to the other, so that they may move out, and let the nails bite to hold them in place, as the form is:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part remains, then anoint the ball with oil, and push it into that part, and pull out the other; and if nothing remains, put this nail in a higher place, and do this until everything comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be pulled due to tightness, then you must wrap it with a cloth until it goes out; then the joint in the palm or at the wrist, and thus you should do for the other hand, and also for the feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the head of the child is large and it is narrow in the outlet, and it has a sharp pain gathered at its head, then you must insert the spathumile between your fingers, piercing the head and extracting the fluid; or you can pierce it with the instrument called "almidach", from which the form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one; and likewise, do the same if the infant has a large natural head; and then pull out the bones with tongs, and if the head pops out and is pulled forcefully, it will be split open so that the moisture that is in the outlet can escape; and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces as much as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce it so that the moisture flows out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the swelling is on his feet, the pulsing is light, and the pulse at the mouth of the wound is weak.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is stricken in the belly or the foot, then you should draw it out by the cloth wrapped around the hand; and make an incision in the belly or the foot, until the moisture that is there runs out; and if the other members are drawn out, and the bowels remain, then he puts his hand into the wound up to the depth of the wound; then he puts in one or two fingers, and draws it out; and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed by a hot abscess that has come there, then one should not work on it, but rather apply moist and fatty things; and the provider applies poultices, and uses warm and softening water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the fetus is on his side, and you can make it even, then one should administer what we have said for a living child; and if one cannot, then he draws it out in pieces, and leaves nothing of the placenta.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if pus is present in the wound, as happens in maritime wounds, and there is bleeding, it should be stopped with a constrictive bandage, and other treatments administered.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose fetus had been dead inside her belly; then another was sewn over it, and the other one died as well.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came in her armpit, and it swollen so much that it opened up and began to discharge profusely.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the cure, and I thought long and hard, but could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong attracting poultice, and out came a bone, and after a few days, some more.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very astonished, because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I probed the wound and extracted some bones until the woman was in a better state; she lived for a long time like this, but sometimes there would be a little discharge from the site. I have included this chapter mainly because when a master encounters something unusual, he should know how to provide relief.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the dislocation back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Hereafter comes the form of the press, with which one is equipped in books; and at two turns of the two sides of the two lines.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Nevertheless, the probe should be more subtle than the constrictive bandage and made of ebony or boxwood; the mouth of the tool should be two fingers wide, and its edges smooth, and about a palm and a half long; and in both sides there should be two adjustments of this same wood, which are firmly fixed on either side, about a palm or a little more in length; and these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the wound to open it when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, with a more subtle and lighter appearance, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the appearance of tongs; and has two adjustments at its ends, as you can see, one palm long, and two fingers wide; and when you see to open the wound all over the instrument, then let the woman lie on the bed, her feet hanging down and her legs open, then fit the two adjustments together in the wound, and hold the head of the instrument between her thighs; then work your hand over the instrument, just as you did with the tongs, according to the amount that you see opening the mouth of the wound, until the midwife does what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all tapered and have multiplied their likenesses; and when the operator has prepared them, they are more nimble in their work and more effective for people due to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despair of the instrument until you have prepared it, for their necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the placenta is retained during childbirth, then you must instruct the patient to hold in her breath, and then make her sneeze with some scent, and hold your hands over her mouth and nose; and if she breathes out through that, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, one should take a pot and make a hole in the lid, and place herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, such as calendula, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in water over fire; then put one end of the pot into the hole, and the other end into the mouth of the wound, and hold it there until the vapors enter the wound; then make the patient sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	Then the scabs will fall off quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment and is not cured, one should command the midwife to moisten her left hand with oil of sesamum or with a poultice of aloe, and then insert it into the birth canal, and feel for the placenta; and when she finds it, she should grasp it and gently extend it straight, so that the wound does not tear during extraction; but she must move it slightly to the right and left, and then pull; it will come out and separate.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the ulcer is open, we have spoken of the cure of sneezing and of the fumigation of herbs; and if it is not cured by all that we have said, then beware that you do not play with fire; but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the ulcer, that you tie it to the thigh of the woman, then cleanse her with an ointment of tetrafarmacon; she will vomit and be relieved, but nevertheless, when she vomits, a foul odor comes to the stomach and the head, and the disease becomes worse.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If this is the case, then suitable smoke treatments are needed: some of the ancients have tried smoke from watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one smokes out the woman is for the retention of flowers and secondine if it is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is like glass in appearance, and one puts the fine end into the nature, and the wide ends above the fire; and there is fumigation over the coals, and the stain until it is wasted away, and then another one begins.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have the anus pierced, but instead have a small subtle fissure; therefore it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that fissure with her finger, and not to pierce it with a sharp instrument, and to guard against breaking the membrane; then she should put moist linen in wine and oil on it, then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will heal, put a wooden peg in the hole and leave it for several days, then remove it when the child wants to go to bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes the clotting comes suddenly from a wound or abscess; then it must be covered suddenly: then it should be treated, as we have said, with a peg of wood.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the fistula in the anus
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from under the anus are nodules, and they grow larger than those that come from within the anus, or in the space between its two parts, whether there is one fistula or several. And when this nodule becomes old, it opens up, and usually white pus or thin fluid leaks out, and sometimes these fistulas burst; and they are apparent when there is either urination or flatulence, or both, when the patient urinates, and sometimes a burst occurs.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And there are fistulas that pierce all the way to the bladder, and halfway down the shaft of the penis; and they can reach the hip joint, and the head of the thighbone.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows a bursting fistula in the anus, and not a non-bursting one: and it is when you push your finger into the anus, and insert a thin needle made of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is twisting, then insert a thin tent made of lead, or a horse hair, as far as you can feel the tent or the hair with your finger; and if you cannot feel it, and no urination, flatulence, or pus comes out, as we have said, then you know that it has not pierced through; so be quick about treating it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula has reached the bladder or the urinary tract, and the urine flows out, and it cannot be stopped by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is perceived just to the joint of the thigh, then the vein is flowing just to the spot; if there is no twisting and the pain is felt all around, then it is that it has become swollen immediately, and neither medicine nor poultice is of use; and in these persisting fistulas there is no cure other than effort, and futility of the foolish meddling of those who interfere.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In that which is not persisting and is not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies on his back, and the doctor lifts his legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs inclined towards his belly; then insert a tent of bronze, or of lead if there is twisting, as far as you know where the vein flows.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it around the anus, then you must insert your index finger there, if without feeling that the tent has pierced it; and it should be uncovered where you feel the swelling or lump, then you know that it is persisting; then work on it no more for one cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One can indeed heal some of them, but this happens rarely; and the help one provides is to heat the cautery subtly according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before; and insert it into the fistula all the way to the bottom, doing this two or three times until you know that the false membranes have been burned, which look like a feather; then cleanse with moist tenters, until those membranes come out, then treat with ointment to heal and seal.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it is thus healed, all is well; but if the tent is inserted and does not pierce to the root which is at the bottom, and there is between your finger and the tent a thick covering of false membrane or pus, and you see the fistula above this covering of the flesh; then cut away from the beginning of the fistula, and insert the cautery again before the tent, going down to the chief of the tent; and the tent will be released and fall out; then scrape off those false membranes which look like a feather, and nothing will remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the pus flows out, and enters between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or a medicinal agent.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Because fire cautery brings together two things: the scorching of the flesh and the stemming of blood and drying of moisture; then treat the tent with butter or crushed substance, until the wound weeps, and the charred flesh comes out with the weeping; then treat the wound with a poultice of dry medicaments.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes all the way from the fundament, and is separated from the body, put your finger in it or in the fundament, and explore inside.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you sense the tent and within it is thread or char, or it is about to pierce, then there must be a way of hope and expectation through one of three means: either cauterize as we have said, or cut all the way to the bottom; if you can, insert tents and treat as before; be careful not to go too deep, lest you cut the tissue that holds the foundation, and let the discharge flow freely from there; then treat it as we have said; perhaps it will heal. Or remove that covering and cleanse after it is cut away from the foundation, by tent or other pointed instrument; then cauterize the charred flesh in the wound, as much as you can; then aim to restore the wound and keep the fistula in the part away from the foundation: this way the patient will feel less pain.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes the fistula occurs in this way: and it is when you place the tent in the fistula, and it is on the side of the foundation below the skin above, so take a tent pierced at the top according to this shape.
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And he puts a twisted thread into 2, and puts the tent all the way through the thread into the fistula as far as the tip.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it pierces through the margin of the foundation inside, then pull out the thread from that hole so that you can place your finger on the foundation; and pull on the thread's end, and bring the two heads together, and press them tightly against each other, and leave it for a day or two; and sometimes they must be pressed, until the threads cut through the flesh that is between them, then cure the wound until it is healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not open, then make it open in every way you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For one must not bandage it tightly for a long time, and then treat the wound as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spatulous bone used to make the fistula is sharp on one side, and smooth on the other; because it should not pierce where it should not, as you can see in the figure.
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two types: they can be inside the anus, like grains of resin, and there can be small or large ones, and some discharge blood, and there can be one or more of them, and they can protrude from the anus and the area around it; but those that protrude have less moisture, and may still discharge a little blood or a little yellow water, and they are colored like the rest of the body. The treatment for those inside the anus is to instruct the patient to straining to go to the bathroom until the hemorrhoids come out, and then you can see the veins; so you hurry and grab them with tweezers or your fingernail, and then cut them at their roots; and if the nails cannot hold them due to moisture, they are grabbed with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of camel's hair; and then pull them out with your fingers, and then cut them, and powder some hot powdered cautery on top of them; or you can cauterize them as described in the chapter on cautery, and then treat other hemorrhoids until they are healed; and if the anus cannot come out, then the patient is given a strong and harsh enema to clean what is inside the anus so that it can come out clearly; when the patient strains, and if the hemorrhoids have come out of the anus, then the treatment is simple; you grab them with your fingernail or tweezers, and cut them, and then treat them as we have said until they are healed and fear incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	You should administer the stitch in the following manner: take a twisted thread and insert it into a needle; then pull the thread through from the top and pierce the needle through from the other side, and turn both ends of the thread beneath the needle, making sure it is tight; then tie off the thread, remove the needle, and do likewise with all the others, leaving one to draw out any excess blood; then place a damp cloth moistened with rose oil or cerate over the wound, and command the patient to rest; and then let him remain until he passes stool, and when it has passed, treat it with ointment and other remedies until it is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	from dryness of the penis or anus
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is dryness of the bowels due to constipation, and because of the natural confinement, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	You should cut away at the edge of a wound with a spatulum or your fingernail, ensuring that it is not moist; then treat it until it scabs over as it should; and if it cannot scab, then repeat the scraping more aggressively than before, until it heals well and is scoured; then treat it until it is healed.
dou fremit	where there is trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Ants are a small appearance fretted under the body, and very much go through the body; and sometimes the frost bites them, and one feels them like death in trembling, and they come all over the body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a candle made of goose fat or fat of a wild bird, and put this candle on the trembling, until the purple circle surrounds the trembling; then turn your hand around the entire candle, until you grip all around the trembling, and push it deep inside, and draw out the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see that it is made of an iron or steel candle according to this form, and it is subtle underneath and drawn above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not pierce it, so as to hold the wound, and to press it And if you see that the wound is cauterized, as in the chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes the enema is made of silver or brass, or molten copper or hammered; and sometimes they are made from these small and large instruments, according to those who use them.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those who administer treatment for children and the feeble and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the enema, whether small or large, is placed above, or the abdomen is bound according to this method:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And there is a bagging where the belly is tied, as you see, and the anus is pierced inside; and it has two openings on one side, and one on the other; and the belly is made into a pouch of a beast's bladder or parchment, and pierced all around with small holes, and there should be one inch between each hole, then insert strong thread twisted in an X or in a spiral around, and assemble the belly as a goat; and when the medicine is inside, attach it to the instrument in front with a strong string, then catheterize; and this is the shape of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	Let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head of the catheter with oil or egg white, or similar, then insert it gently; then the minister squeezes his two hands together, so that it is completely empty, then remove the catheter, and let the patient lie with his legs against a wall, and if the medicine wants to come out, let him strain as much as he can; and if he sleeps all night like this, it is more helpful.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you syringe him for a disorder of descending stomach, and the medicine rushes out, then you repeat it until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are in the anus or an abscess, then let the catheter be as thin as for a child; and this is the shape of the subtle catheter under which the skin is stretched:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already discussed in the division the cure of wounds; now we will discuss manual and medicinal cures according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and by what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by the hitting of stone, and cutting with sword or knife, or lance or staff or arrow, or similar; or that they are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or head, or leg, or belly, or liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and begin with simple wounds of the head, for their memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, then take care if it is from a blow of stone or similar things, and the skin is still broken and the wound is large, and you quickly doubt a hot abscess: then make him bleed from the cephalic vein immediately if there is little blood coming from the wound, and let the bleeding be in the opposite direction to the injured part; and let the patient avoid fullness of wine and rich foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to bleed, then let his food be diminished, and do not drink wine or eat meat; and put cotton soaked in rose oil only, or in astringent wine on the wound if hot abscesses come from it; and if there is no hot abscess, then put powder on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and has not been moved by air; I will describe this powder a little later. And if it has been moved by the fire, then put some ointments on it until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like that of a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be closed with sutures, then close it by sewing it shut, as I will describe for abdominal wounds.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to the bone, and can be peeled back, and is only attached by a small piece of skin, then cut it away; next, cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods such as testes and cooked wheat, as well as meat, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find pus in the skin, and it is not attached to the bone, then cut away the pus, and if there is a vein or artery in the wound causing blood to flow, and it cannot be staunched with medicine, then tie off the artery, and if that does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is easy: you should put this powder on so that the burn has healed.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of making the powder is as follows: take incense one part, dragon's blood two parts, and quicklime three parts, and grind it into a fine powder, and apply it to the wound, and bind it tightly so that it is well absorbed and joins with all its blood; then dress it well, and leave it uncovered if there is no swelling; for one does not remove the medicine until it has healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one applies chalk alone when one does not have incense or dragon's blood, but one should move the wound with the cautery.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound has been moved by the fire, let it be in the same state, and do not apply any of this powder to it; but apply some digestive ointments, or barley flour made with water and honey, until it heals; then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	If the fracture of a bone comes with the wound, and it is small, I will extract it with delicate pincers; and I will tell you about fractures of the head later.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound on the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck and it is single, there is no difference between it and that of the head, except that the nerves or artery of the neck are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is a nerve, there is nothing else to do but let the cure proceed, and not apply anything constricting, for it hurts the nerves and makes them withdraw; and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member; but use warm medicines, such as hot water washed in cool water, and cooked in honey with rosemary oil, and also washed in cool water, and other minor stones according to this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then cut it and bind it, then heal it until it is cured.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and it is chapped and full of pus, then pierce it or a lower place; and if an artery is cut, and bleeding ensues, then stop it, and cauterize it if necessary; and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the windpipe, and the passage for food is blocked, then cut the windpipe on the side of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then bind it firmly, and leave it for a few days, then treat it with poultices until it heals; and if the wound has left an impression in the bone, then probe it; and if there are pieces of bone, then remove all that you can, and leave those that you cannot reach until the wound heals and the wound is cleaned and the passage cleared. And if the wound is fresh, then apply powder to the powder as I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, then treat it as I said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a blow from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then examine whether the wound bleeds profusely: then you will know that the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, then do not put the powder on in the first hour, nor ligature it because of the bleeding that occurs profusely and returns to the heart, and heals the patient; but apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day; and if you have no ointment, then put old cotton in the wound to draw out moisture, and let the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; then no spasms, nor bad tremors of the heart, nor strangulations of the bowels will come; and when you see good signs, then you will know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Heal it then with poultices and other remedies until it is healed; and if it cannot heal and the wound persists, you will know that there is a fistula; treat it accordingly.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife, and it is simple, in the front or back, treat it as described above; if it is large, stitch it; and if it is small, treat it with powder, and if it is deep in the bone, and pieces have come out, clean the wound, and draw out the foreign objects if they are not stuck; and if they are stuck, let the wound fester to loosen the objects, and then extract them; and for other wounds on other parts of the body, the treatment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	of a rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	There are great, medium, and small ruptures of the belly; from the large rupture sometimes the intestines, or the nerves of the intestines, protrude through the wound; and stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a small rupture is worse than a large one because it is harder to stitch up the intestines gradually, placing them back in little by little as they are heated, for the intestines swell immediately when they feel cold, so they are placed back in more easily, and for this reason a small wound is better, as one can gradually return the intestines to their place. And know that there are four types of rupture of the belly: the two common ruptures occur in belly stitching, and the ruptures of other wounds on the body; and the other two types are specific to belly ruptures, and I will describe each type and explain them.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small and something from the intestines protrudes out, and it is difficult to put back in, it is due to one of two reasons: either because of the size of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in such a way: moisten a sponge or soft cloth in lukewarm water, or cook it in squinch-water with cyprus and spice, and rub the intestines until the swelling goes down; sometimes this wine binding remedy helps to reduce the swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling subsiding, wet or warm the intestines with water in which alder and mallows have been cooked, because it is harmful to cut into it without great necessity; and if it cannot be inserted, make a small incision in the wound using an instrument used for hemorrhoids; and the first remedy is better than cutting, which should not be done without great necessity; and the instrument for splitting it: insert it into the wound and push it out, and observe the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines pop out, he must be put back together according to his natural shape in his own place, if you have the power, for this is better.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is low in the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on his back with his legs raised higher than his head. If it's high in the abdomen, then he should lie on his side with his head and feet higher than his torso. If the rupture is in one of the sides of the abdomen, then he should be positioned so that the injured part is higher than the other. You should arrange things as I instruct for both large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, use what you have available and hold in your hand a pair of forceps that covers the entire wound edge, then bring the two edges together; this is the common method of stitching, which is to pierce both sides of the skin and the underlying tissue with an needle, through all four edges simultaneously. Then, pull the needle through with a double thread, tie off the ends, and repeat as needed according to how many stitches are required for the wound. The needles should be medium-sized, neither too fine nor too thick, so that they can pierce the skin and underlying tissue without further damaging the wound. After stitching, pad the needle heads or ties with cloth to prevent discomfort when lying down. Leave the stitches in place until the wound is healed. This method of stitching with needles is best for smaller wounds, as it requires fewer stitches. The second common method is to bring together just the skin and underlying tissue edges with a single needle and thread; once all four edges are pierced, pull the needle back through the starting point, in the manner of sewing cloth. Leave about half an inch between each stitch. This method worked on a man with a large abdominal wound that had been made by a knife, with intestines protruding two inches from the wound.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned the intestine after it had been outside for 24 hours, and the wound was sewn shut for 15 days, and I treated it, and it healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And they had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where one could not find any medicine; and I put clean cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you about two proper methods of suturing: take the needle and thread it through from one side to the other; when it has pierced right through from one side to the other, then tie off the thread where you threaded it on the needle, and make it pierce through again from the other side to the first; and the idea behind this type of suturing is that you sew just like a tailor sews pelts, and you leave some space between the stitches on one side, and pull tight on the other, until the wound is completely closed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of stitching, which Galen describes properly, is like how one joins two pieces of wood naturally and applies the end of one to the other, in such a way: pierce an needle through the tip of the foreskin close to the glans, and only pierce that spot, leaving the two ends of the foreskin; then turn the needle and pierce from the outside in until you reach the inside, piercing through both ends of the foreskin; then pierce one and then the other from the outside in until you reach the inside, in two other tips of the foreskin that are on the other side; and this is the most common and best method of stitching.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen says this, and some testify to it, that one should stitch the abdomen with two needles, with thread in each; and one must push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew wounds; and know that when the rut is on the belly, the stitching is more painful than in other places on the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds: and it is when you find the fresh wound full of blood, so that the burn has moved, then put back the intestines, and the coat; then put on the powder charm, and if the burn has moved, then put on some ointment that is present, until the wound heals; then cut the threads, and sew the stitches, and the mirach; then cure the wound as the others, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicine, then put on, as soon as it begins to heal, old cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	Because you don't need any other medicine for many dispositions where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound will cause community to the principal members, then it is necessary to moisten a light pad in tempered heat oil, or rose oil, and place it around the anus, and under the buttocks; and if there is pain or porridge in the bowels, and it happens many times, then enema with warm black wine, and likewise if the porridge comes just to the intestines; and pierce it inside, and know that when it's the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine which is called "young" cannot heal when it is raw, and this is due to the thinness of the veins through which it is, and the subtlety of the whole body, and its proximity in nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the vein leaps out of the wound, then put it back as well as the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and has become green or black, then you should tie up the area that is black so that bleeding does not occur there, for there are veins and arteries there; then cut off what is between the ligature, and hang the two ends down from the part below the wound to ease extraction when the vein breaks, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	of the wound from the boiling
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is pierced, and the wound is small, then one can restore it in some men, for I saw that a man was wounded in the belly with a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and became a fistula, and the excrement and flatus escaped through it; I applied treatment according to what I could, and did not cease to suturing until it healed, and the edges were sewn together.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him sewn up, I doubted that the patient had an illness in his belly; but he had no ill, but remained in better condition, eating and drinking; and some experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in such a way: take a large thread, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the thread has opened its mouth, place it on top of the two lips, so that it stretches his mouth shut; and then tie the head of the thread, and it will stay so that he cannot untie it, then put another thread after in the same way as before, until the wound is completely closed; and then cut the thread.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If these threads enter the intestine and do not harm the patient, one can sew up the intestine with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal, in such a way: take the end of this intestinal thread that is well chewed, then tie to this intestinal thread a fine linen thread, twisted, then put the thread through a needle, and sew up the wound, and tie it up in a knot; and this method of sewing with threads is safe only according to the way of hope and expectation; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the grails of the intestines, there is nothing that can be done but subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it wakes up, is universally called a "fistula", and especially when it is swollen and becomes bowed inwards.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is according to the verdant nodule, a hardened and white swelling, where there is no pain, and is bowed in like the beak of a bird; sometimes it is clear and bowed out, and other times thick; sometimes small, and sometimes large; I have already spoken of these in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and has no pus, is caused by one of nine things: namely, through a deficiency of blood or flesh; or due to wickedness; or because there is hard matter within, and on the surface, that does not allow pus to form; or there is too much swelling; or the location is poor, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine used is ineffective; or the corruption is of a pestilential nature; or due to the nature of the region where digestion and healing are slow, and swelling occurs naturally; or there are veins or bones involved: I have already demonstrated all these causes, their signs, and medical treatments in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Then I will tell you about the treatment for a fistula, which is done manually.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	You should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, from the syrinx, or intestine, or bladder, or any of the ribs, or from the spine of the back, or from any joint of the hands or feet; and they can also affect the principal organ of a limb, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are in this way are a difficult cure, and there is only labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you see it, then take an iron or tent, if the fistula is straight, so pick it; and if the fistula is crooked, then seek with a thin tent of lead, for the lead bends around the bend; and if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot pick it well with tents, then cleanse it by enema through one of the openings, for moisture travels from one opening to another, and cleanses; then press it strongly in your hand, so that you know if there is bone or nerve, and feel if it is deep, and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you press; and when you truly know the location, and whether it is distant from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or any of the places I told you, then treat it according to what I have said, and remove the foreign matter and corrupt flesh within; and then cure it until it is healed; and if the fistula is very deep and straight, then you must probe deeply, as much as you can, then place moist tents in medicine water, and insert them into the chief of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom; and then apply healing ointments to healthy flesh, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize as we have said; and if the bone is damaged by the fistula, then probe it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerve bothers your limbs primarily, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is decay and blackness, then treat it as you would a wound until it is healed; and if it is not healed, and returns to its previous state, know that you have not gone deep enough: probe and dig until you reach the bottom, and remove all the decay, then restore the area; and if it is healed in this way, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the decay is too deep for you to reach it; then there is nothing more to be done except to let nature take its course; and if there is a small corrupt bone, and you can pull it out with tweezers, or with whatever instrument is suitable for this purpose, and if there are many bones, pull them all out, one by one; and if moisture causes a contrary effect, and there is no error or fear, then cut and dry, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in one hour, place something on the wound to promote suppuration, and let it fester around the bone, and then the bones will come loose more easily; and if it is a large bone, such as in the leg or thigh, just clean away the corruption until all the blackness is gone, then dress the wound; and if there is a large amount of rottenness, and it goes right down to the bone marrow, then it must be cleaned out and packed with a poultice right down to the corruption, and then the wound should be treated until it heals. And I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you can take example and help from your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	He was a young man of about 30 years old who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from inside the body, so that the matter came to the leg and it was swollen with a large abscess, and there was no reason to drain it; but they treated it so foolishly that they caused the abscess to rupture, and a lot of matter flowed out, and it became a fistula, and many holes opened up all over his leg, through which pus and moisture from the body flowed profusely; and many doctors treated him for two years, and there was no one skilled in the art of medicine who could help, so I was called to see him.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of the openings, and then searched all the openings, and found that one led into another all over the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	So I hurried and cut into one of the openings until I exposed a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption extended to the bone inside; I removed what appeared to me of the rotten bone, and thought there was no more corruption except for what I had taken out; and I began to heal the wound with strong medicines for a long time, but could not close it; so I started again, and exposed the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, so I removed it, and then healed it with medicines; and it was healed and closed quickly, and there was no need to restart the operation except because of the weakness of the patient who could not bear it, and because of the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For often the blood-letting bled profusely, but he was completely healed, and a hard lump grew in place of the bone, and he was in good spirits and had no discomfort or pain anywhere, nor when walking or running.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken anywhere in the body, one should treat it in this way: take a thread, and tie it to the head of the exposed bone, and have someone pull it upward; and take another larger thread of linen, and tie it over the lump that is above the bone, and hold the head steady, so that you draw out the corrupted flesh from below, and expose the flesh where you see the corruption, so that the thread does not cut into the flesh; and place a hot iron or a wooden splint beneath the bone to cover the corrupted flesh; and one must keep pulling until one can see and feel the corruption, and then pull again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover the flesh all around; then put a firebrand underneath, and then bind the corruption from one side to the other, and bind the wound near the site of the corruption, as we have said; and if the corruption is at the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and bind the bone on the other side; and if the corruption is in the area between two joints, there is no other way to treat it except by cutting; and if the corruption is at the knuckle of the hand or the foot, then this thing is very difficult, but you must still inquire into the nature of the corrosion, how it presents itself to you; and clean it in every way you can, but be careful not to harm the vein or nerve; and know that there are many methods for binding these bones, depending on the structure of the bones and their appearance, their thickness and thinness, their size and smallness, and their hardness. And therefore, you must prepare an instrument for each type of work; and know that your art will show you the instrument you need, according to your knowledge of this craft, and the testimony of the ways of sickness; so choose the instrument you need according to what is appropriate.
dou feu	fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The heads may suffer harm due to internal causes or external ones; and when you have treated this corrosion with remedies, yet it does not improve, then one must cover the affected limb up to where the corrosion occurs, so that the patient escapes death, or the greater evil of the defect in the limb; and the signs are that the limb becomes black, as though burnt by fire, and then it turns red after the blackness, then this corrosion spreads from limb to limb, and affects the whole body; so be quick to cover it, and if it is due to the sting of some venomous creature, such as a scorpion, viper, or similar, and the corrosion is on the head, then cover it, and do not give it space to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it reaches the hand, then cover it at the joint so that the corrosion does not reach the arm; and if it reaches the arm, then cover it at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, then it is fatal, and there is no remedy beyond reducing the quantity of the poison; and so also do for the leg: if the corrosion is in the first joint, then cover it after the other joint; and if it is on the foot, then cover all the foot; and if it climbs up the leg, then cover at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no remedy except to cut off the limb and let the patient die; and the way to cover the limb with a bandage is that you bind it above and below, and extend one bandage downward from the upper binding, and another bandage upward from the lower binding, and you loosen the flesh between the two bandages by a span wide, so that the bone is exposed; then cover it with a bandage, and place a linen cloth on each side so that the bandage does not touch the healthy part, lest the patient suffer further injury or an abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	If bleeding occurs when you operate, cauterize the site thoroughly or apply restraining powders; then return to your treatment until it is complete. Then bind the injured limb with suitable bandages and treat it until it heals. I will tell you what happened to a man who had a dark discoloration resembling a burn on his leg: The corrosion first appeared on his big toe, spreading to his entire foot. When the man saw the corrosion, he wrapped his foot, and it healed. Long after, the corrosion reappeared on his finger, and he came to me. I applied repulsive substances after purifying his body, but I couldn't stop the corrosion. He wanted me to cut off his hand, but I refused, as I had no hope of repelling the matter, and I was afraid that if I amputated his hand, he would die, for his vitality was weak. He despaired completely, returned home, wrapped his hand, and healed. I have only told this story so that others may learn from it and know what to do if they encounter a similar case.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	There are times when an abscess forms in a fleshy part, and remains so long that it creates a great gathering of pus; and then they rupture and drain, and the pus flows out, leaving the place hollow, just like a vessel; and the skin on top is as thin as a piece of cloth, and does not extend to the bone or nerve, and such a disease is called 'sain', and is not called 'fistula'; but if it becomes so prolonged that it reaches the bone in a deep place, then it is called 'fistula'; and the skin is such that you can cover all of this skin all around, and especially when it is thin, just like a piece of cloth; and it does not become infected because of its thinness.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you have reason to believe that the skin is becoming infected, and the infection is not deep, and the flesh is thick, then use this enema: examine whether the breast is swollen, and the pus within has a foul odor, then prepare an Egyptian medicine in this way: take ash, and oil, and litharge, in equal amounts, and place it in a vessel over fire, until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey; then take some according to your need, and dissolve it in water and honey, and use it for an enema on the breast, and compress the orifice; and leave the medicine inside for two hours, then remove it by squeezing it out; do this several times, until the breast is cleaned, and the pus is eliminated; and sometimes an enema of water from ashes is used when this medicine is not available, and you take vine ash, and pour water over it, and let it drain, and use it for an enema, until you know that the breast is cleansed; and if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or water from ashes, then use water and honey with a little litharge ground in it; or you may use an emulsion of honey and wine, so that the honey has properties of cleansing and washing, and the wine causes the abscess to drain; and when you have done this, and you have reason to believe that the breast is cleansed, then use an enema of something that makes flesh grow within it, and take a diaphoretic ointment, and mix it with rose oil and wine; or you may use any medicine or ointment of which I have spoken in the section on ointments; and if the orifice of the breast is small, and the tip of the enema cannot enter, then enlarge it with a needle, and place a tent made of Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment, inside so that it reaches as far as it can go; and if the wound is too large, then cut it and leave only enough space for the enema to enter, and if the orifice that drains pus is above, then cover it, or cover it below where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Because when the bowels are at a standstill, you should not allow food to enter; and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish, then arrange things so that the bowels move to the lowest place they can, for when the bowels are at a standstill, you should not allow food to enter, and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish, then arrange things so that the bowels move slightly downward, and do not leave anything of the bowels; and take consolidating medicines to put over the wound, and let them be on top of the linen drape that covers the entire wound; then tightly cover the opening of the breast where it is widest above the first, then apply ointment over the other drape according to the amount of the opening, and place it over the opening of the wound to loosen the bowels, and do not remove the large drape for several days; and often remove the one on top of the opening of the breast to loosen the bowels, and test what comes out of the bowels, whether it is venom or pus, or clear, or digested, or undigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in such a way and you see the nature that appears on top of the wound, then know that the breast is healing, and approach the wound; and then loosen it in the morning, or midday, and when you loosen the wound, change the other drape, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast flows yellow bile after many days, know that the breast does not open.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons spread over a long time, do not despair of health, for health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are those who suffer long-term wounds in their flesh, and of those whose wounds heal the opposite way; and if digested bile rises from the breast after many days, know that the breast is not healed; and if the breast takes a long time to heal and is distant, then apply dry medicines that are moist in substance but dry in nature, such as diaphanous ointment, for it contains a large amount of vitriol, and it is the last medicine; take diaphanous ointment and make it with rose oil, and the rose of old wine which is equal in substance; then cook it and use it; and that same thing is done to thickened honey when diaphanous ointments are not present, or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them into powder over the honey while it is on the fire; and then glue a cloth over it, and place it over the breast, and sometimes aristologus which is long, and roots of celestial lilies, which is as fine as flour and centaury; and use simples or compounds: grind them into powder, and apply them over the honey that I mentioned earlier, and use them; and if the fistula takes a long time to heal and is not healed by this treatment, then know that the corruption has reached the bone, and causes hard swelling in the bones or limbs, or in the soft tissues; so the cure for the fistula is as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of an abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panaris is an abscess that arises under the nail of the finger or toe, or occasionally elsewhere; and when it becomes infected, and no attention is paid to it, then the abscess grows, and it runs and oozes pus as far as the root of the nail, and sometimes all the way down. And it eats away at the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the area around the nail becomes swollen, and the color turns yellow.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have described in the previous section, and the treatment does not help, then you should trim away all the excess tissue around the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cautery is a great help if the bone and nail are healthy; and if the nail starts to grow over the wound, and it becomes infected, then you should place a piece of hot iron under the nail to scorch the flesh, and push it upwards, and carefully trim away the infected flesh, and apply burning and corrosive medications to remove everything; then treat with ointments until it heals.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it out and pull it out, because as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal; and if you see the toe become corrupted, cut it off at the first joint as previously described, then treat it until it heals; and if it becomes gangrenous and swollen, and causes great pain, then you must treat it first; then cut the nail of the sprain with a diagonal cut, and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh under the nail, because the patient would feel too much pain; and if this happens, place something over it to soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of a sore tooth in the jaw
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two big toes that grow on the hands of some men by chance are all flesh, and by chance there is bone in it, and sometimes there is a nail; and sometimes they grow at the root of the toe joint, or the growth is in one of our toes.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	He who is born with an extra digit on his hand does not change, but he who is born with an extra digit at the joint of his hand sometimes changes; the size of a person with fleshy digits is slight, in such a way: cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born in the root of the joint, if he is painful to cure, hold him tightly.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For he who is born with an extra digit on his foot, you should first cut the flesh around it to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable thread, then treat it until it heals.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	Judgments that come to both together come by birth, or by sudden wound, or by burn from fire, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Then you should cut the digit so that the fingers grow according to their natural form; then place between two wet tents or drapes moistened in rose oil so that they do not stick together; or place between two pieces of thin wood so that they adhere, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If sudamen comes to any of his hands with the palm, he catches it as appropriate.
des vils	of the villains
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Veins are large enveloping vessels full of melancholy excesses, which come in many parts of the body; and they occur more in legs of those who walk on foot and who work and carry loads, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore you should administer to him sometimes a purgative of collyrium, and then heal it with basil.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment with fire is in two ways: one is to press it and draw out the black blood; the other way is that you open the vein and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	Amputations are done in the following way: first, heat the leg with very hot water until the large veins are dilated, then stretch the leg from above the thigh to the joint below the knee; then cut the vein in one place, or two or three, with a wide incision, then open and draw out the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, as much blood as the patient can tolerate; then ligate it and command that he eat meats with black pepper; and restart the bleeding and the cauterization when the veins are full, and bandage the wound.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The treatment of the wound is as follows: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then put it in the bath, and heat the leg with hot water until it turns red and the veins swell; and if you do not have a bath, heat it over the fire, and then cut the skin at the top of the wound, from the knee to the ankle, or in the part below the ankle; then open the skin around the wound, so that it appears when touched; and when seen, it is red and black, and when it enters the skin, it looks like a white cord; then tie a thread tightly under it, so that it is raised from the skin, and then cut it at another place above three fingers; then open the skin over the wound so that it appears, then lift it to another hook, as you did before; then cut another incision, or several if you need to, then lift it and cut it at the toe of the foot, then pull and lift it up to the second incision; then draw it out from incision to incision, until it is all drawn out, then cut it; and if you cannot pull and lift it, then tie a strong double thread to a needle, and pierce and pull it, and tie it under the wound, and turn your hand from side to side, so that it comes out; and be careful not to burst it, because if it bursts, it cannot be pulled or lifted, and harm will come to the patient; and when you have treated it all, put on the wound a moistened woolen cloth with wine and rose oil; and cure it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vein is constricted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must split it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron used to cover the vein is curved and does not cut so that it covers the vein; it has a large curve because if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but it should be large as we have said, and here is the shape:
de la voinne civile	of civil veins
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is winding in the legs, in warm parts where grass or trees do not grow, and in land without moisture; and by chance it grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens from the pus that comes under the skin, just as snakes and worms come inside the body, winding between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a great swelling comes in the leg, then the place changes, and the vein begins to go out, as well as the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the vein is open, you should wrap it around with a piece of linen three and a half to four inches long, and the knot, and let the linen hang loose on the leg, and every time it comes out of its place, wrap it around the linen, and if it is too long, cut off a part, and wrap the rest, and do not cover it at all in its root, until it is all come out; for if you cover it, it will go back into the flesh, and cause an abscess and swelling in the place, and illness; therefore this vein should be treated little by little to the end, and nothing remain in the body; and sometimes this vein is as long as five or ten palms, and a man came to me once, from whom it issued ten palms long, and when you cover it, put in a reed or pipe, and pierce it to the bottom so that all of it comes out; and empty the matter which is inside, and bring medicine to the place to prevent swelling for several days, then cure it as you would an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes with this vein the hand bleeds, and especially when it opens at the joint of the foot, or in the foot, and there comes a lot of blood out, and from which it bleeds profusely; treat it therefore as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that live between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called "cow disease" in our land because it often affects cows, and it is a small worm that lives between skin and flesh, moving throughout the body, going up and down, and can be felt as it moves from one part of the body to another until it breaks through the skin and emerges; it is caused by the putrefaction of certain humors, like worms, snakes, leeches, and roundworms in the belly; and it is feared for its malice, because when it moves through the body and reaches the head, it can enter and destroy the eye; this happens frequently.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being cured and drawn out, it cannot be prevented except by waiting until it has drained; therefore, you must tie the area above and below with a strong string tightly, then press on top and draw it out forcefully; if the pus is deep in the flesh and you do not draw it out, cauterize it with fire until it comes to a head. The greatest harm it does is that it runs into the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming near the eye, tightly constrict under it with a finger, then press on top and draw it out forcefully. It is necessary to use cleansing remedies for the body with dissolving medicines for the putrid humors, and cauterize with flesh-eating substances.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from flatulence
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called "vomiting" in our land, and it is a pain that affects some members, and then moves from one member to another; and I saw what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and I uncovered her arm, and saw a small swelling on the vein of the arm; and soon after, I saw it rising up as fast as a worm to the shoulder, quicker than anything else, as bright as silver when it moves from one place to another; the pain left that spot and went into the shoulder, and then a little later ran throughout the body, until it reached the other arm; then she said that she felt it turning around inside her body, just as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was very surprised how she moved from limb to limb like that, because I had never seen this disease progress in such a way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Nevertheless, I have seen many whose pain moves from one place to another, but not as I saw in this woman; and I thought it was because women's bodies are dry, and their veins exposed, and that this forced wind appears; and it does not appear in this way to those who are healthy, but to those with moist bodies and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then ligature above and below firmly, and then compress gently until that forced wind is issued from its place; and cauterize the spot; and if you do not see it yourself, then treat it by those who dislodge the winds, as with foul pills, and serapin pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearance and according to the place in the body where they land.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	There are many types of stones: some have large, small, smooth, or pointed angles; some have two angles, some have tongues, and some have fragments. And when a stone falls into a limb, it falls in two ways: either into a principal member, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, spleen, kidney, intestine, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When therefore she falls in any part of the body, and you see the signs of death which I shall tell you about later: then you must beware of extracting this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many cases; and when you do not see these evil signs, and the arrow is not deeply imbedded, draw it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the signs of the brain are when the arrow pierces the bone and reaches the brain, and there is a discharge of blood from the nose, and from the ears; and perhaps they lose their speech and voice; and there is white moisture like pus coming from the wound, and also bruising of the flesh; and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and disturbance of the mind, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps there is a discharge from the nose or ears; and perhaps they lose their speech and voice; and there is white moisture like pus coming from the wound, and also bruising of the flesh.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The signs of a hernia when it occurs in the chest or abdomen are that it is located near the left breast, and feels as though it were pierced by a hard object, not hollow; and sometimes the hernia is silent like the pulse, and discharges black blood, and there is a chill and cold sweat, and a fainting: then know without doubt that death draws near.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow wound that pierces the lung is that without pain foam comes from the mouth, and the throat swells, and the patient's color changes, and they sigh deeply and seek the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow pierces into the covering of the foot, it is located between the small ribs; and they spit up a lot of phlegm and experience great pain and sighing; and all their limbs move from the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrow hits the gut, by chance something indigestible might escape from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow hits the belly, and nothing comes out of the intestine but feces, then there is no hope for a cure, nor in extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow hits the bladder and urine escapes and comes out, and the patient feels great pain, know that the wound is lethal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, elbow, spine, hip, thigh, and leg, and similar members, are safe according to various dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or artery and it is not venomous, as I will tell you so that you do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man that an arrow struck him in the jaw, near the root of the nose; I treated it, and drew it out from under the fat of the ear, and he was healed without any pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And I treated a man who had an arrow that struck him in the fat of the eye below the eyelid, and the arrow was stuck, only the tip visible towards the nose; the arrow was as large as a Turkish bowstring, with a thin iron head; he was healed and no ill effects occurred.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And I drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow to the ears; I lanced the abscesses, and I gently extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And I extracted an arrow from the liver of a man, who thought he would die; and after thirty days his condition did not improve; so I cut into the arrow, and removed it, and there was no bad outcome.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a man with an arrow in his back, and the wound is closed over it; and the arrow remains inside him, and his natural functions are not impaired, nor does he experience any discomfort in any of his natural processes.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And I saw another man who had an arrow in his face, and the wound was closed over it; and he remained like that without experiencing great pain; and there are many other such cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And I treated an arrow wound in the home of the prince, the king, which was lodged in his eye, and was slightly tilted to the right; and the arrow was completely removed. I was called to the cure after three days had passed.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I examined it with a subtle probe, and did not feel anything; but he felt pressure and pain under his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the tip of the arrow. I placed a drawing and digestive poultice on the site to prevent swelling of the wound; and I saw the mark of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the poultice for several days, and the wound healed quickly, and the patient suffered for a long time, feeling the arrow in his eye for a day; and he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied a corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it opened, and I probed and felt the tip of the arrowhead underneath; then, using this medicine, I widened the opening of the wound until the head of the arrow became visible; and within four months, the wound healed well, and then I lanced the wound and pulled with tweezers from both sides but could not remove it; so I continued to treat it with various instruments until one day, using specially made tweezers, according to the method described at the end of this chapter, I extracted the arrowhead and healed the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the doctor believed that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored; so I restored it, and the wound was closed, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your care into what I do not say, for books cannot encompass everything; but wise masters consider well a very small thing, and what is present and lacking to them, they devise new works and new instruments, in the descent of strange things that come in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows enter the body in two ways: either through the place where they entered or from another part; and those that exit through the place where they entered are arrows entering into fleshy parts, and sometimes they exit now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not exit right away, then leave it as long as the surrounding flesh is rotten and the exit is cleared; and also, if it is lodged in bone and cannot exit, then leave it for several days, moving it every day; and then it will exit, and if it doesn't, then pierce all around with a very thin needle until the surrounding area is widened, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the head, and goes just to one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have mentioned appear in the patient: then do not pull it out, but leave it until it is even after a few days, for if the arrow reaches the brain, that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is lodged only in the bone and does not reach the brain, and the patient remains for several days without a bad accident, then treat it by pulling it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is lodged deeply and cannot be removed, then apply cauterization around the wound, as I have told you; then clean the wound until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is lodged deep in the body where you cannot see it, then explore all over its path; and if you feel it, pull it out with an appropriate instrument; but if because of the depth of the wound and the penetration of the arrow there is no bone or tendon or vein in the way, and if there is a great deal of flesh, then cut open the wound to the size of the arrow, and if there are any barbs on the arrow holding it in place, remove the surrounding flesh from both sides as much as you can, and then bend or fold back the barbs so that you can pull out the arrow; be careful not to break the arrow as you try to extract it.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do this in one go, then leave it until the skin around it becomes toughened, and then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the bleeding makes you feel unwell, then do as we have said about the treatment in its chapter; and be careful not to cut the nerve or open a vein, and use whatever means you can to pull out the arrow without danger, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient as he was when the arrow struck him, for that is the greatest help there is, and if you cannot, then place him according to what the symptoms show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Arrows that come from another direction, or where something is protruding from them, or where the skin is swollen and it can be seen or felt: cut above, as far as the tweezers can reach, and then pull it out; if it will not come out now, try again later.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is stuck in the bone, then rotate your hand roundly, as far as it goes into the bone, and widen the hole, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it will not come out, then leave it and try again later; and if there is part of the arrow inside her, then remove it all; and if the shaft is broken, and you want to use leverage, then use a curved instrument so that the point of the arrow goes into the curve of the instrument; and then pull it out, and if the arrow is bent, place the instrument with its point entering inwards, to make the extraction easier.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is touched, then you must cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, then treat the wound as it should be.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow pierces the buttocks or thigh or stomach or bladder or side, and it is close to the surface, and you can cut around it, then do so; but be careful not to cut into the vein or nerve, and then pull it out, and then stitch up the wound, if necessary; and treat it until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of tweezers used to treat arrow wounds is similar to an owl's beak; here is their shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	There are many types: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrowhead.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of a broad-headed arrow is like the feather on an arrow, to push at the point of the arrowhead, just as it is shaped:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the tongs to push and to pull it out if it is in there:
des voinnes dou cors communes	common body veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are thirty-one veins from which one recovers, and they have sixteen in the head, namely: two batons located behind the ears, called the "ear-veins"; and the two temples that are visible on the sides of the eyes, called the "temple-veins"; and the two veins in the eyelids above the eyes, called the "eyelid-veins"; and the vein in the forehead; and the vein at the base of the nose; and the two windpipes located at the back of the throat; and the two veins below the tongue. These are the veins known as the "gullet-veins".
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins that are commonly used for bleeding are V in each arm: one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side, and the common people call it "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called the "fast", and is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and the common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side, and the common people call it "vein of the belly", and it is above the cubital fossa, and it is the one that is used for bleeding, which opens clearly above the elbow.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the salvatella is the vein that is between the auricular and annular, and it has II branches; and in the leg and foot there are III veins: one is below the bend of the pouch on the left side, and the second sophene which is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein that is called  "nesse", which is at the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg there are III veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The bleeding of veins that are behind the ears is helped by old cathartic remedies, and by emigration; and the qualities of the sanguinary, as I have told you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then press the patient's neck to a pulse, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places, depending on the head; then sign with your finger, and where you feel the pulse under your finger, press inward; then take the lance, and pierce beneath the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand to the entire vein upstream, and cut through both the skin and the vein thoroughly for a distance of two fingers, and make the blood flow until you see it; then press and ligature it, until it is healed; and I have already spoken of the incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The bleeding of the two arteries in the temples is useful for treating ancient migraine, and sore eyes and habitual blindness, and tears in the body of the eye; and the quality of the bleeding is as I have said: and it makes the patient turn his neck so that the two veins are clearly visible; then he feels pain under his toe, and then signs himself with his hand; then he applies the hot stone above the vein on his finger, and inserts the lance below, and opens the vein above, and draws out the blood according to his need; then he releases the patient, and puts his finger on the vein for an hour, then cotton; and then binds it up firmly, and leaves it until it is healed; and we have already spoken of their binding and extraction in the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The bleeding from the vein in the forehead is as effective as the bleeding from the cephalic vein for old diseases of the face, and for migraines and redness; and the qualities are such that the patient turns his neck until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fosseur", of which here is the shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point over the vein, and press gently with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow according to the amount you see; then release the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healed, and sometimes the operation can be done with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Nevertheless, the flames should not be too hot; and the sick person is crooked, for the bone is close by, and perhaps the flames will break when they are thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The bleeding from the two veins that are in the jaw helps with teeth, and with tinea, and redness, and with a stye in the eye, and with diseases of the face; and the qualities of their bleeding are such that the patient turns his neck by twisting some ligament, as before; then bleed him, and the bleeding should be across the vein, a little from the long flame, a little wide, because there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, they may break; then draw blood from it, as much as you need, and then bind it with a thread, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The bleeding of the vein is good for ague, and for sudden frenzy, and for diseases of the face, such as migration and redness that comes to the face, and also when it is old; and the quality of the bleeding is that the patient squeezes his throat, then pulls out his nose with your left hand, and takes a long, slender flame, and inserts it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well there, and the blood will begin to flow now; and do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then ligate it overnight, for it is quickly restored. And this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The bleeding of the two veins helps with strangulation of the larynx, and with the beginning of hoarseness, and many diseases, and with impetigo, and with scurvy, and with herpes, and with ulcers; and the quality of the bleeding is that the patient squeezes his throat under one or both armpits, as we have said; and let the master stand over the patient's head, and the patient sit on a chair, then bleed the vein on the neck widely for a short time, then draw the blood gently, as needed; then do the same in the other vein, then loosen the ligature, and squeeze both veins gently so that the patient does not choke; and let him be until the morning, so that the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	of bleeding from the lips
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	Bleeding from the veins of the lips helps with sores in the mouth and gum corruption and lip splits and toothaches.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the nature of the bleeding is to have the patient sit before you and strain his neck as I have said; then turn the lip and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, which can be recognized because they are black, and because there are small black veins around them: compress both, and if you do not recognize them and you are in doubt, then compress the largest of each side, and likewise do the same with the two veins above and below, for it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of bleeding under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The bleeding of veins that are underneath the tongue is helped after the bleeding of the cephalic vein; and it is in the constriction of the throat, and in diseases of the eye, and in diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the bleeder is such that the patient feels faint between his hands in front of the sun, and he lightens the tongue, and looks under each side for a black vein: therefore heal one and the other, and do not go too deep, for underneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the neck from which one usually bleeds are healed in two ways: either with a large mirtin flame, or an olive-shaped one as thin as a needle, and is called 'anesil'; and they are large and thin according to the width and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the mortar is highly renowned, and it is wide as you can see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open wide veins that are filled with thick and apparent blood, and which contain thick and troubled blood; and this is the shape of the olive-shaped flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more pointed and refined, and is used for bleeding subtle veins, where there is thin and yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps diseases that are under the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly; and the surgeon must cut it bleeding, and cauterize the artery underneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he cuts the artery and bleeding ensues, it must be staunched as I have said; and the flame should not be held, but cut like a bridle.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilic does not open clearly, then you must probe it and change to another vein; or you can take a vein from him in his arm: it will open clearly; and you cut it with the flame, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you want to know the location of the vein, you must stretch out the arm and feel the pulse; then mark the spot on the inside, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein with the flame, as we have said; and be careful not to cut into the artery when you see the spot is swollen, for it is the artery: avoid it therefore.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it rising up like a child's urine, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is arterial blood: therefore, hurry and put your finger on it for a long time, then take away your finger if the blood stops, which often happens; tie the arm, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient; and let him be in fear, and do not move him until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood is staunched, and he vomits, and the medicine is not present, then press on the artery until it is closed, and stop the flow of blood.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Take a piece of oak bark, and split it, and take one half and tie it on well until the next day; if the blood stops, that is good; if not, then treat it as we have said with powders that stop bleeding; and the stopping of the blood is not harmful in many conditions because of the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The bleeding from the vein is helped by its being opened from above and from below, because it is composed of basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said; and the bleeder must be careful not to pierce too deeply, and to find the vein, and if it swells and the wound is enlarged, and by chance cannot heal; and this vein often opens, and in some men does not open because of its subtlety, so you should bleed it with a sharp instrument, and cut the vein as best you can.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, they will cut it through the long one.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The bleeding from the cephalic vein is helped by its being opened from above and from below; and one should bleed it with a flame of olive oil or of myrtle, for this is the safest of all veins, for there are no nerves or arteries beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Nevertheless, one must seek the lightest place, and if one fails the first time, one must try again; and by chance, some men swell up where they fail the first time, but it does them no harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the cautery depends on your skill.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you should know about bleeding is that it is only done to maintain health and prevent future illnesses; bleeding should be performed in one of the three veins: the cephalic, the fast, and the basilic; bleeding should be done at the beginning of lent, in autumn and winter after eating when the signs of digestion are apparent; and one should bleed on the first or third day after two or three hours of the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	Bleeding that is administered for illnesses does not have a set time, but whenever the need arises during the day or night, in all hours and at any time; one should not bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor should pregnant women be bled after the fourth month until the seventh month.Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should the very old who have passed 60 years be bled.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when anyone wishes to bleed themselves, in whatever manner, they should first evacuate the bowels with a gentle enema if they have retained much feces, so that the veins do not draw harmful excess fluids from the intestines into the principal limbs; nor should one bleed those who are bloated from eating too much meat, or who are drunk, until some time has passed, or those who are suffering from dropsy. And one should not bleed after a colic attack, vomiting, diarrhea, or excessive sexual intercourse with a woman, or from exertion, watching all night, or fasting; rather, subtly reduce the humors through food and drink, if you have the skill; then enter the bath to subtlety the blood, and bleed from the arm vein around the bend of the elbow on the third day, as we have said; and guard against exertion, puncturing, and luxury that day; and be calm and cheerful, and let the person bleeding be higher than the one being bled, and stroke their arm two or three times; then tighten the ligature above the vein gently, for if it is too loose or too tight, it will not work; then stroke the area with your hands until the veins swell and are felt; then moisten the bleeding person's arm with a little old oil, then place the tip of their left hand on that vein below the spot where they want to bleed, so that the vein does not slip away from the needle.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flow as strings do in a bowstring, and some are filled with wind so that when one applies flame to them, they withdraw from the flame and cannot open the vein; thus it is with these. And if one opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow for this, so it behooves that surgeons be skilled in such matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein works the first time, that is good; if not, do it again a little lower down at the same spot or above, if the area isn't swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the vein is swollen and the patient is afraid, if you leave it for one or two days and do not bind the arm, perhaps an abscess will form; nor should he enter the bath, but resume bleeding if it pleases him; and if the opening is small, insert a thin blade into the vein and apply flame directly to the opening; and work gently and quickly so that the vein swells; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the wound is swollen, do not restart the bleeding, and put a little liniment of oil on it, because it lightens the body of blood, and in this place the liniment of oil; and thus administer the liniment of oil in every wound that you bleed the veins, to stop the flow of blood; and this same thing does triacle and bowels do when they are put on the spot; they subtly draw out the blood when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens, especially when it is not bled except for that once when the opening of the vein is small, you must hurry and put a sponge moistened with warm water on the spot and hold it there for an hour; and you must do this after the flow of blood from the wound, and if it remains in place for some days and a blackness or greenness appears, it does not matter; and if you see it, put something made into a ointment of aloe or myrrh.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there occurs an abscess and appearance at the exit of the vein: therefore place your hand upon it, and if you find the spot soft to the pressure of your hand, then is that appearance evil.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore beware that you do not place anything of what we have said upon it, for perhaps it pierces through an artery; but make a dry plaster to harden the spot, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to its quantity and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for one who is full and swollen, and needs bloodletting, that one makes a larger wound on him, and the flames should be wide; and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and one should bleed them a little and often, and one should bleed them by cutting diagonally, not by piercing; and this method of bleeding is safe from blood loss and nerve damage, and it is better than bleeding from a long or wide cut.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for one whose body needs bleeding, it is good to give them wet bread in pomegranate juice; if they are feverish, then eat it three or four times before the bleeding. And if of a cold complexion, then eat wet bread in rosewater syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chives, and very fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints at the bleeding, after the loss of much blood, then one should drink a mixture of meat broth and subtle fragrant syrup, and use other things that we have said in the division of syncope, for the opening of the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to empty his arm and bleed again, it is necessary that when he is weakened by a great bleeding, that he bleeds a little at a time according to the amount of his continued strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And he who wishes to open his arm after the first bleeding, and has strong pulse, should bleed seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wishes to bleed elsewhere, should do so on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For he has much blood inside his body which is now scorched, and it brings on fever; so one must draw out a great quantity, and widen the vein until it bleeds freely; then you should check all the conditions of bleeding, and put your hand over his pulse while he bleeds, so that death does not come in the place of fainting, and this happens many times when the surgeon is negligent; and one must not press hard on the vein when it has bled a second time and is closed, or if it is crooked, stretch out the arm forcefully, for that would be bad; but let it bleed until it heals a second time; or touch it with the tip of a flaming torch, so that the congealed blood at the opening of the vein melts, and put a little vinegar in water on it, and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, leave it and don't constrict it at all until the abscess is drained.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to let blood a second time, then bleed in the same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The veins in the arms are healthy in the area of the vein in the head because it is compound.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the way to heal it is for the patient to put his hand in hot water until the vein turns red; then let him be bled slightly, so that the vein appears well, then heal it now from the center, not from the side or the end; and let the incision be wide, and let it be healed close to the joint of the hand, and if it cannot come out, put the hand back in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you have enough; and if it is winter, do not put the hand back in hot water, because it is put in more in winter than in summer; and the healing of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is no artery or nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The healing of the save-the-right-hand vein is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is how: straighten the hand, and put it in hot water until the vein is swollen; and if you see the vein, then heal it from the center, and if you cover it completely, then it will not hurt; and do not go too deep, because the nerves are all stripped of flesh underneath, and then put the hand back in hot water if the blood is frozen in the wound and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have stopped the bleeding as much as is necessary, then put oil and silk on the vein to stop it, and do this for each vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The bleeding in the left hand is beneficial for the disease of the mouse, and do everything just as I told you about the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The medicine of the sophia is good for all diseases that are under the body, such as diseases of the stomach, and retention of fluid, and diseases of the intestines, and the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of its medicine are such that the patient puts his foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it breaks, and applies it to the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, and up the foot they go a lot of veins; therefore heal them at the widest vein, or at the ankle, whichever is better.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you cut it off at the foot, then guard against the nerves underneath, and cut it through horizontally as well as vertically; and let the flames be extinguished.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water and let the vein empty well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the medicine does not work the first time, try it again the second time higher up, because the place is salty; do not worry about nerves, as we have said, and similarly make sophia of the other foot in the same way.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The location of the sciatic vein is at the ankle, and its pulsation indicates the pain in the hip, when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the nature of its healing is that the patient enters the bath, and twists above the ankle IIII turns, for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then heal it in every way you can, and by twisting; and it is better that you close it, for the place is safe, and it is very relaxed in many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not twist it, then heal any vein that opens on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and watch out for the nerves; and make the blood flow until you see it, and then untie the ligature, and put on cotton and press it; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of cupping
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Leeches are made of horns, or brass, or glass; and bloodletting is done in two ways: by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping that is without heat is done in two ways: with or without fire; and cupping which is done by cauterization and by the extraction of blood is performed in 14 places on the body, one of which is at the top of the head; and another is in the neck; and two others are on either side of the neck; and a cupping glass under the chin; and cupping glasses on the two shoulders; and cupping glasses over the hips; and cupping glasses in the two arms; and cupping glasses in the two legs; and cupping glasses at the ankles; and cupping does not draw blood, except for tiny veins that are scattered in the flesh, and because of this it weakens them in no way, as is done with vein-cutting; and it should not be administered, neither with fire nor without, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the whole body has been emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	If, due to illness or habit, one must bleed, then we let them bleed every hour at the beginning or end of the month, and during the night and day; for there are those who, when they need to bleed, feel a heavy head, and some experience bloating and redness in their face, head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes; and some have a drop of blood in their mouth, and their tongue swells, and they taste blood.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially if they occur during the month, we command them to fast after the third hour of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The bleeding of the nose helps with headaches ... that come to the eyes, and it must not be after the evacuation of the whole body; and this venting is in the place of the bleeding of the cephalic, and it must not be used by those who are of a cold complexion, or who have catarrh, for it does them great harm; and for this reason, the elderly should not use it, nor those with cold diseases in their heads.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who recover from it often become oblate, and for this reason one should place the cupping glass a little lower down in case of oblateness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation in the neck is in the location of the jugular vein and the basilic vein, and because of this, it helps with constriction of the feet, and with fissures in the channels of the lungs, and with vomiting and distension; and one must not press on it too much, for if it is held too tightly, it causes damage to the throat, stomach, and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventilation at the two sides of the neck helps with headaches, and blindness and weeping eyes, and strangulation, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and is located where the basilic vein is; and one must instruct the patient to express their hand while putting it on, so that they do not compress the artery and cause blood to flow.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	Winding pains below the chin cause mouth disease and gum corruption, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of bleeding from the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Winding pains in the shoulders cause disease that comes from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The ventilation in the armpits is like three veins in the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins; and instruct the patient not to press too hard, for the area is bare of flesh, and underneath are nerves and arteries.Li ventosations de la pethe si vaut a la sainie dou pormon, et a estrecement des cotes, et a dolors del costel, et a sainie des os; et covient que tu commandes au sainor qu’il ne fière mie par la voinne, car s’il le fist, il velt la pethe.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping glass placed on the buttocks is good for hemorrhoids and diseases underneath; it should be large, made of copper, and well-suctioning; and if it were thin, it could break and cause large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The leg cupping glasses heal very effectively, for they draw blood from the entire body and are good for old pains in the hips, and the joints of the loins, and the bladder, and draw out humours; and are placed over the two sciatic nerves, and over the two ankles, and yet they weaken the body after long use, and bring fainting in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method for applying the cupping glass is that you place it first empty, and suck gently, and press firmly, and move equally, and do not stop doing so until you see the area red and swollen, and the redness of the blood appears; then stop, and remove the cupping glasses, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are those who have very thin skin and clear pores; therefore one must strike only once, and one must make wide wounds, and a little deep; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, then it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to open the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very thick, then it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we want to draw little by little, we only need to strike once.Et se li sans est gros et espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois, et la quarte.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	If we want to draw a lot of blood, we should make incisions often; if the blood is thick, pierce it with a needle, and if the skin is tough and hard, with narrow pores, one should anoint the places where the cupping glasses will be placed, with an aperitif and dissolving oil: if the patient is in good health, with violet oil, or with sweet almond oil, or with squash seed oil; and if they are pale, with watercress oil, or lily of the valley oil, or camomile oil, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the swelling is large and cold, then take oil of marjoram, or of balsamite, or of fennel, and similar oils.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if they have soft skin and large pores, one should not put any oil on them, but rather wash with rosewater, or cold water, or mulberry water, or squash water, or porcelain water, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have a lot of moisture should get up from garlic, or myrrh water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	Those with large sores should rise from old wine, or water of sugar, or a decoction of aniseed or camomile, or other similar remedies; and one should not bleed by leeches before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and one should not sleep after being bled, and it is necessary that he should warm himself when he is to be bled and when he has been bled.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And watch that the patient is not choleric, and that the blood is not too thin and inflamed; then he should eat cool foods such as pomegranates, endives and lettuce with garlic, and similar things; and soft foods like purées, and porridge, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those with a cool complexion should drink honey syrup and medium-old sweet wine, and eat soft foods like purées and porridge, and small birds and pigeons; and on the day he is bled, he should drink more than he eats; and it is good to give some men triacle or musk before or after bleeding to comfort the principal members; and the blood must be subtle but those with a hot complexion should not drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The cupping glasses that are placed without breaking the skin are those that are placed on the liver, and on the mumps, and on the gout, and on the belly, and the groin, and the ribs, and the hip, because these members do not bear being pierced with holes, and it is only done to draw blood from one member to another, as we do when we put them on the breasts when the nipples are healthy; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we do when we place cupping glasses on the belly and the groin to reduce the size of the member; and it takes away pain when there is inflammation or a stone, and by its attractive power it may draw out the inflammation, or dislodge the stone from its place; and thus it acts when one applies it to the liver and the mumps when there is retained wind, and these cupping glasses are administered empty merely to suck; and sometimes they are applied with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water, as in diseases of the pleurisy, and in this way one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the fire cupping instrument is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	It is two digits wide and half a palm deep, and on the side near the middle it has a small hole, just big enough to push through an awl, made of bronze or iron so that it does not hurt the patient when placed over the affected limb; and in the middle there is a crossbar made of bronze or iron, to hold a candle, and they are larger or smaller depending on the illness and the age of those who use them, for the ventouses used on children are different from those used on the old, and those used on the thin are different from those used on the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And thus one must apply this ventouse to the affected limb: take a candle made of wax or tallow, and place it inside the ventouse so that its flame is at the bottom of the ventouse and does not burn the patient; then apply it to the limb, and hold your fingers over the hole we mentioned, so that when you wish, the vapors may escape, and remove the ventouse. Then take the tallow as before and reapply it frequently if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the cupping glass therefore which is administered for the disease of pleurisy, has no pipe nor hole, and is not released until it is full of water, and is placed on the limb only; and that is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Leeches are not released until in members where one cannot place cupping glasses due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in bare flesh, such as testicles or nipples, and others; and the quality of using them is that when you find leeches that are in clear, clean water without any dirt, take them; and put one needle into clear water, so that they become accustomed and do not move in their bellies; then heal with a vein-opening and cupping, then rub the member until it turns red, and place the leeches on top of it; and when they are full and start to bleed, if there is a place where one can place a cupping glass, do so, for that is much better.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, then raise the area with ash, and then with water, very well, and then squeeze it out; and if the vein bleeds too much after the body of the leeches, then moisten a linen cloth in cold water, and place it over the wound until the bleeding stops; and if the bleeding is profuse, then apply crushed vitriol, or gales, and similar things, until it is stopped; or you can place half a handful of peeled peas over the area, and leave them until they turn dry on the spot, and it will stop the bleeding now; and if you need more, take other leeches.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the leeches will not attach, then rub the bleeding area with fresh blood, or you can insert a needle into the vein and then place them over it, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will attach; and when you see that they are defecating, then sprinkle on some powdered aloe and ashes, or cinder, and they will stop now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is a cure for fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that the foolish men who wrote this chapter never saw any of the ancient books, nor did they read them; and for this reason, knowledge is strange in our land, for I have never found any good ones; and I know nothing about them except through the knowledge of the ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have learned their science, and through experiment and the habit of my life. And I have described to you in this chapter what is contained in it, and have abbreviated it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments used, as I have done in the two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we should say in the prologue of this book about the matters contained within, and the chapters where the sage sets his understanding, and dwells upon truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a break or dislocation or twisting or crushing occurs in someone, you must hurry to heal the patient from one side and the other, if nothing else prevents it, such as weakness of the body, or a fever, or old age; or if the weather is not very hot, or too cold; and eat cool foods, that is, cool birds and kid meat, and do not drink any wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and do not fill yourself too much with meat that fills the veins with blood, until you have a doubt about a hot abscess or the spreading of matter in the limb; then return the patient to their first treatment.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, one should nourish the patient with foods that promote swelling, or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, testes, feet, pig's belly, offal, freshwater fish, and full-bodied wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	Because with more swelling, the break will heal faster.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well healed or united according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children; but have no worry, reset the broken bone, pulling on the large tendons that extend and join the limb together, as tightly as it was before; and do not stop at any point in his work, and because of this one should eat plenty of meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter about all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	Because there is a fracture which goes towards the root, and another in sharpening, as with the tip of a writing quill.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with a wound, and a break throughout a small split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And in each way it has its own art and proper instrument for restoration, according to what the memory comes into his mind; and the fracture of the bone is known by the fact that the joint is twisted, and clearly appears by feeling, and sounds on being pressed with the hand; and when there is no twisting or pain on touch, but the patient feels no great pain, then there is no fracture; but there may be a dislocation, or split, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You must not move it with your hand, but apply remedies that are described below, and then hold it steady with a gentle grip.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the fracture which goes in the bone, and are the two parts separated, they must now be put back together evenly, so that abscesses heal; and if cold abscesses come, he leaves it for a day, until the abscesses are healed; then he puts it equal to the movement that you can leicht and gently, and know that the restoration of which is easier than the restoration of one where there are pieces; then he tightens, as it should be done hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, whether it is in the hand or foot, or to your hand if it is a small member, or to two tendons, or one tendon and your hand; and put the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are separated, he pulls by all means the additions into their places as you can, and guard so that by your work does not come to the patient injury or pain; and fit well the two heads of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	Feel it with your hand to see if it is not in the right position; then adjust it properly and do not strain or press too hard as those do who cause hot abscesses and contraction of the limb through their treatment, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is ready, then treat the patient carefully so that he does not move it, whether waking or sleeping, turning or otherwise; and be sure to keep the limb so secure that he feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, it is not yet healed, and you must put him in such a position that he feels no pain; and be careful that it is set aright, so that no crookedness comes to it when it is restored; and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken members vary in size, shape, and form.Les quels conviennent a l’un et ne conviennent pas a l’autrier;
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small limbs, such as arms and fingers and the like: these should be wrapped in soft, fine linen; and for larger ones, such as thigh and leg: these should be wrapped with a wide, strong bandage, because wide bandages embrace the entire large limb and constrict it evenly from all sides, so that there is no swelling; then wind lightweight linen or cloth around it three or four times according to the size of the limb, and press your hand firmly on the bandage all around, then go above the fracture and constrict less, so that the fracture is drawn out a little; then soften the bandage little by little, until you grasp most of the healthy part, then take another bandage and wind it around directly over the broken part; then go to the part below the fracture and constrict gently, neither too hard nor too soft, as we have said above in the first hour; then put between the bandages linen or cloth, so that they are all even, then bind everything above with a bandage, and then put your splints well-made on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place something hot to soothe the abscess and reduce the swelling, leaving it like that for a few days; then press down on the teeth, which should be made from half a piece of split cane, or from wood used for making clefts, or from palm wood, and they should be shaped thus:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	but the tooth that is placed on the break should be a little bigger and wider than the others; it should also be as long as the member needs to be short or long; then press down on the teeth as you did at first, then tie a thread over it appropriately, just as in the first instance on the break; the tighter it is, the better; and the thread should be fine, not too coarse or too fine, and it should be made of soft flax; for if the threads are coarse, as I have seen fools do when they make their ligatures with tightly twisted cords, that is a great mistake, for the ligature cannot be equal if it is too fine, and there should not be less than a finger's width between each tooth.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is raw under the eyes of the stars after the straining in their healthy state, then place underneath them lint or woolen rags so that it does not blister.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a fracture and the skin is broken, I will describe its treatment below.Car li grant maladous que l’on dit estre de la piere ne sont pas touz si de la piere; mes de la briseure qui adont la piere, et del chié qui de la briseure adont la plaie; si est li granz maux, et la grant piere ne se peut guérir si l’on n’estranche la piere.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not appropriate to dislocate all broken limbs on the first day.Car li maux adont les membres par la briseure, et la piere que adont la plaie, il covient li premier jor estraindre li maux de la piere, et le second jor esguarer li maux del chié; car il ne doit guérir li maux de la piere li premier jor, mes li autrez joures.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the member is large, you should not put splints on it for more than five or seven days, or longer depending on the heat of the abscess; and here is the way of the ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: You take the flour that is left on the walls of the mill, cook it with plenty of egg, and apply this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it. This is the common way of the plaster that restores fractures in various conditions, especially in women and young children, because it is not too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way of plaster restoring the fracture and dislocation and twisting: take 3 grains of barley and ladani and ennule and asafetida and gum arabic and mastic, each 10 grains; myrrh and aloes, each 5 grains; alechil 8 grains; and make them into powder, and mix them with plenty of egg; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, because it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is useful to many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way of plaster that is good for twists: take mastic and balm of gilead, each 10 grams; myrrh and aloes, each 8 grams; aqua armena, 6 grams; and grind well, and cook with water or plenty of egg, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method of plaster for joints and bones that have become dislocated from their sockets, and to ease the resulting pain, and to treat fractures: take new linen and soak it in lard and cooked oil, then apply it to the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not heal, but it is good for soothing hot abscesses and easing pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of poultice that heals broken bones: take dry fig leaves and dead nettle leaves, crush them together, and make a poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of plaster to heal fractures and reduce swelling from an abscess.Take the yolk of a hard-boiled egg, and mix it with vinegar until it becomes thick like honey, then add powdered herbs, and apply it to the affected area.This plaster is good for healing fractures and reducing pain and swelling.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take the root of marshmallow, chamomile, violet flowers, and wheat flour, one part each; grind them and mix with wine to form a paste. If the affected area is hot, then mix the paste with coriander water or regular water and apply it.This plaster is good for healing fractures and reducing pain and inflammation.Take the yolk of a hard-boiled egg, and mix it with vinegar until it becomes thick like honey, then add powdered herbs, and apply it to the affected area.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method of ointment stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of marshmallow, and flax seed, comfrey, and myrrh, and flowers of violets and chamomile; of each take one part. Grind them and cook in water with salt, or fresh water, or wine, depending on the heat of the limb and its condition.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hypocrites says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken member to heal it other than a ointment made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says it should be between soft and too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen says one should put on the broken member, to heal, dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another type of ointment that is good for injury and pain: take mugwort and shaved human hair, or bird feathers, and bee wax, and mix them together, and grind them up, and make an ointment from it and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then loosen it a little after, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor move the bone from its place; if not, loosen it after several days. And if pain comes to the site, or itching, without rest or swelling, hurry and loosen it, and remove the ointment immediately; take a light cloth, and sponge of sea moisture, and dip in water, and lift the site until the itching stops and the pain is relieved; then let the limb rest for an hour, then place a wet linen moistened in water or rose oil, and bind upon a nut, until you are sure there is no hot abscess; and the inflammation of the limb will subside, and the pain will be removed, then begin the binding gently again, and a little ointment, and do not tighten it as much as before; and gently until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that there is heat and redness and pain and swelling still remaining in the body, and you need ointment and binding, then restart it, just as you did at first.Et se tu vois que li membre est sane et apaisie, si le tiens en repos et en legier cheis, et ne le deffait mie tant qu’il ne soit tout sanz dolor; et tu tiens li membre ou il doit estre, si com tu avies fait premierement.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	If the limb does not receive anything of what we have said, do not dislocate it until three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what one sees, as long as the fracture heals, and the joint approaches the bone underneath; then restrain it more than before, and increase his food, as I have said before; and if you see the site drier than is necessary, know that nourishment cannot come there; therefore soak it with warm water every time you dislocate it, and do this every third day, and loosen the bandage a little; through this work, nourishment reaches the limb, and quickly corrects what the foolish healers do, who restore the limb crookedly: this is bad, and such work is cowardly, and I see nothing in it but laziness and doing it correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many types of fractures, with different shapes and distinct causes. Some fractures are caused by the impact of a sword, breaking the collarbone all the way to the hip, as happens with an axe or a pole; this type of fracture is called a "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword strikes the bone without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound of these two fractures are great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is concussion accompanied by swelling, or fracture, or a blow from a stone, or falling on a stone, or similar.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a fracture penetrating to the membrane just under the bone, or on top of the bone; and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is repented in the bone as thin as a hair, and the crack is small, then this type of fracture is called  "capillary". And if the wound is caused by a stone, or by falling, or by a similar object, and the bone fragment enters below, and the site is smooth like the smiths when they work on kettles; then the bone is split.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more to those with soft bones in the head, like the heads of children; and it happens with all types of fractures where small pieces are dislodged, as with tiles; I will speak about them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we should know all types of fractures through examination, and through the corrupt flesh that is on top of it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair is known by this: when one uncovers the bone and rubs it gently, then the fracture appears black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, pay attention to any bad signs of illness, and if you see any harmful incidents, such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, seizures, feverish shivering, eyes bulging and turning red, and other similar symptoms in various conditions, then it cannot be healed without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any shocking incidents and you expect a recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the patient first comes to you and it is winter, then you should remove the splint before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the spring, then you should hasten to remove the splint before the seventh day so that the flesh underneath the bone does not rot and cause the incidents we have described.The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	If the fracture of the bone comes just to the membrane that covers the brain, then you should split the split part thus: and it is that you press the head of the wound, and expose on the bone in all the ways you can, and over the shape of the wound more gently than you can, and if bleeding occurs when exposing the bone, or a hot abscess, use aid as appropriate, and fill the site with soft rags moistened in rosemary oil; let the wound rest until the hot abscess is soothed, and make sure there is no further bleeding; then start around the bone to remove it, and this is done according to two methods of work: one method is that you cut straight ahead with a small knife, and this is the shape:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then put another cut larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second manner is that you have a number of diverse tools, some narrow and others wide, and are pointed, and made of iron; and work gently so that you do not blister the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is thick and hard, you must pierce it around, so that you administer tools with chisels, not deeper than to penetrate through the bone of the skull, and it should have above the point a rim or .i. circle, which does not let the point pass through the bone; and you should have several of these, so that each one comes in its place in the thickness of the bone, so that you have chisels for all skulls; and this is the form of the .iij. ways of chisels:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing around the broken bone is to put .i. chisel on the bone, and turn with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced; then put the chisel elsewhere a little later, and thus do all around, then cope with the incisions the space of the bone which is between the holes, and do this most subtly and gently, as we have said, so that you draw out the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments you have, such as tweezers, pincers; and beware of touching the brain or the membrane.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and cut the bone, it is appropriate to resect the membrane that is remaining on the bone with any other similar instrument like an incision tool, but it must be more blunt and thinner than the other incision tools; and if anything of the small bones or scales remain, remove them lightly with the instruments; then treat the wound with tenting and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of treatment is that which Galen describes, which is safer; and he praises it highly, and his words are as follows:
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	First, you must expose a part of the bone where the open fracture is located; then, once that part is exposed, place under the head of this lens-shaped instrument, of which this is the shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, and the part is pain in both sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then hit with a small mallet above, so that you gently kop the bone all around, and be careful of the membrane that is underneath; if it is adhered to the bone, then loosen it slightly, for the bone can be loosened without harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is only cut slightly on top, and there are small pieces, then you should smooth that roughness, and remove the scales with a very thin razor, of which you should have various quantities, in order to apply the most suitable one in each place, according to the action and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Take first a large razor, and then a thinner one, and do not cease doing this until it is smooth.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hairline fractures and delicate breaks, you should apply treatment according to their nature; and this is something that is not laid out for one who has dedicated his study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the wound is exposed, you should take a piece of linen according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it over the wound; then take another double piece of linen, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first piece of linen; and do this as gently as you can so that you do not put pressure on the sinus, then administer medicine afterwards through another opening, and do not pull harder than just to touch the wound; and leave it like this for one or two days, until the abscess is relieved, then loosen it, and apply medicine such as linden roots, and flour of beans, and incense powder, and aristology, and similar things; and make a powder from these things, and place it over the wound, and administer medicine without biting; and be careful that the wound is clean, so that you do not leave any ointment on it, nor let any pus collect under the membrane of the brain, for when pus collects there, it causes great harm to the patient.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, if no ill accident comes to the patient, as we have said, for it is certain without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if blackness does not come from the medicine that one has put on it, for such virtue that it has, then you must take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil and glue a cloth to it; then treat it with treatment methods as is appropriate, until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the jaw above are broken, either by themselves or together, for they are two bones; and below is cartilage, which does not break but only bends or twists, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should boil your little finger or a needle, and place the break inside your index finger, and hold it in place with your thumb, until the nail grows back to its natural shape; do this lightly, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your treatment.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the part above the nail, and cannot come to the place of the finger, then you must put it equally at the top of a piece of wood, rather thick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is in two parts, do this likewise, and try to restore it on the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscesses are healed, then boil a tent of linen cloth around the nail if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you attach another from another part, if the fracture is there; and let the tents be so thick that they fill the openings of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some restorers say that one must soak the tents in butter and change them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I do not think that this is good, but one should soak the bandages in egg white and flour; then leave the bandage as long as the bone is broken, and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes they attach goose feathers instead of tents, and wrap it in a silk cloth, and keep the fracture still, and the patient breathes through it; do as you like.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if painful abscesses come in the nose while you are working on it, then apply cerot or cotton soaked in rose oil, or a little dyer's alkanet.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses form, then apply a poultice of wheat flour and incense powder, infused with egg white, then place light bandages on top, but do not tie them too tightly; and if the fracture is small, and it is broken into tiny pieces, then extract it with suitable instruments, cleaning and closing the wound with warm, soothing ointments and poultices, as appropriate for such injuries; and if there is no wound inside the ear, then treat it with bandages, and apply canes of lead until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the dislocation of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is dislocated below and there is no wound in evidence, and only the joint is dislocated without fracture, and not broken in two, so that it is bent inside, one can perceive this easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the dislocation is on the right side, you should insert your right index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if it is on the left side, insert the right index finger and gently push the joint back into place with the other hand, keeping it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the dislocation of the jaw is dislocated to one side, one should administer an extension of two parts, so that it becomes even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement in the teeth, or a fracture, then bind them with a gold or silver wire, or silk; then apply cerate to the broken mandible, and place a double drape over it; and place a large, well-made splint, or a piece of equal leather, long and wide according to the mandible, and tie it in place as tightly as possible; and instruct the patient to rest, and eat soft foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the jaw is changing shape, then loosen it on the third day, and then put it back into place again; and apply ointment over it, made of powdered millstone with egg white or flour, after you have removed the cerate; and place a thin layer of lamb's wool over the ointment, and if the jaw is not healing, and its condition remains unchanged, leave it as long as necessary until it heals, sometimes within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if a hot abscess comes, then administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, examine it to see if any piece of bone has been displaced; then reset it with suitable instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and nothing remains inside, then stitch the wound, if it is wide, and place upon it suitable poultices to promote healing, until it is healed.
de la forcele	of the armpit
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The armpit may break in many ways towards the shoulder, and there are three types of breaks: it may be broken and displaced in two places with pieces, which is the easiest to heal; or it may be broken with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is when there is no wound in the fracture, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder which feels the broken collarbone; and the other stretches the neck towards the part; then put the break equal in your hands, so that it has neither appearance nor swelling.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend more, then put under the shoulder of the patient a round piece of cloth, or of woolen cloth, and let it be thick according to your need; and they lift and loosen the collarbone, and hold the cloth in your hand, so that you make the break even, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the collarbone out of its socket because it is deeply embedded, then the patient should lie on his back, and put under the shoulder a small pillow, and the ministers press the shoulder down, until the bone of the collarbone is raised up.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then grasp the break with your hands, and if you find it split, then you must split it open; and gently pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot join because of any swelling, then use this instrument to ward off the skin:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	it resembles a spoon, and is not hairy, and is as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and it has two heads, as you can see, and one is wide, and the other narrow, as is the shape of the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are sure of a hot abscess, cut the wound, and if the channel is small, or if you doubt the hot abscess, apply the wound with bandages and tenting, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses come, then moisten a piece of linen in rosemary oil and garlic and wine, and place it over the wound.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The stretching of the bone, when there is no wound or fracture, is to place on the bone the poultice of mill-dust and egg white, and place light dressings over it, and put a small sponge under the joint, if you need it; then take a very large band one palm wide, then place a doubled cloth over the dressings and poultice; then take a slender staff three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that band so that the head of the band hangs down; and place the staff over the fracture, and wind the band around the neck, and under the healthy shoulder blade, and under the sick shoulder blade; and adjust each part, and when you see that the binding holds the fracture in place, and you clearly see that the staff does not move on the broken bone, then reward it every day, and when the ligature becomes loose, tighten it; and make the patient lie on his back, and put a small pillow under the shoulder blade to raise the shoulder, so that the dislocation is eased by the stretching of the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck and do not release it if no bad accident occurs, up to twenty days; then start the poultice again, if you see that it is needed, and adjust it, and let it be thus, until it is healed; and it is usually healed in twenty-eight days, or less for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Then the shoulder may be broken or widely separated in the middle, and one should not use force except through touch; then adjust the apparatus according to the shape of the fracture, and reset it according to its natural form, in every way you can; then apply flour from the mill with plenty of egg white over the area, and light cotton pads, and place a double linen cloth on top; then place a large, thin pillow, slightly larger than the shoulder, on top, and if there are any hairs underneath the shoulder, stuff them with cotton so that the pillow lies evenly; and then tightly bind it with a large bandage, so that the pillow does not move from its position, and check the binding every day; and whenever it loosens, tighten it again, and adjust the pillow if it has moved, and let the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder will be restored in 20 or 25 days. And when this number of days is complete, loosen it, and be sure, for it is not a bone that sets easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone protrudes forward, and not under the heart, then cut it off, and the bone, and do as we have said in the dislocation of the shoulder to soothe the hot abscess.Et se l’os tent desoz lou keur, et non pas avant, si fent de la maniere que nos avon dit; et se li espaule ne puet estre restoures, si covient li faire une chire ou une fente en l’espaule selonc la brisure, et le mettre dedens, et puis le brancher selonc la forme naturale, et le brancher fermement, et le deslie; et se li espaule fuert plus largement del keur qu’il ne devoit estre, si covient li faire une chire en l’espaule adons de la fente, si que li espaule siet igalment, et li faire brancher fermement, et le deslie; car il ne pouet estre restouree.
de la brisure dou pis	of the dislocation of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The feet are sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; they often break at the ends.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it declines downward, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of movement, and numbness, and sometimes he vomits blood, and the hair falls out from the broken bone, and he feels ill in that area.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is for the patient to lie on his back, and place a cushion between his shoulders, then press his shoulders together, and bring the ribs closer together with his hands, and carefully adjust the bone to its proper position; then apply plasters and poultices over the fracture site using a delicate salt or some other lightweight substance, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it onto the broken bone so that it does not move; and re-wrap the ligament around the back, and tighten it gently, and check every hour if it has softened, and if so, tighten it; and if it needs to be loosened due to corrosion or itching at the site, or pain or an abscess, then do so quickly, loosen the ligament, remove the plaster, and treat according to the nature of the condition; then re-apply the plaster and tighten until healed.
de la brisure des costes	[treatment for a broken rib]
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that rib fractures occur only in the thick part near the back, and in the front near the chest, and they do not bend except because they are slippery; and it feels good when pressed on both sides.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatment is to reset the break evenly as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply the ointment, and hold it in place with a splint if necessary.Et si li cheveimens ne vout pas aler sus li os, et qu’il soit brisiés, si met l’esguilez, et puis l’emplaustre, et li estele sus l’esguilez; et s’il ne vout aler sus li os, si met l’esguilez sus l’os, et l’estraint d’une estele, et met l’emplaustre sus l’estele.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is bent inward, then the patient feels great pain and piercing, as with pleurisy, because the bone pricks the lung; and it also causes shortness of breath and vomiting a great quantity of blood, and it is a very serious condition, and the ancient physicians placed great importance on it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that one should administer foods that swell the belly in order to push the fracture out.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not agree that hot abscesses will not form if they have not formed already.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if he has come, then heal him.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some say that one should apply cups to the area to draw out fluid, and this is reasonable; however, there is a risk that the cups might attract excess fluids due to the weakness of the tissue.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some say that one should cover the area with warm, moist wool, and place tents between the ribs to create equal pressure all around, then it is cured by the treatment of pleurisy, with food and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the hair does not grow on the broken bone, and there is doubt in the patient, then one must cut above the site of the break and insert an instrument to draw out the splinter; and then one must split the bone, and gently pull it out, and then sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat it with ointments until it heals.And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure from the bone pointing through the skin, and there is doubt in the patient, then one must cut above the site of the break and insert an instrument to draw out the splinter; and then one must split the bone, and gently pull it out, and then sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat it with ointments until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a hot abscess comes, put on wet rags in rose oil, and apply it to the site; and while the site of the abscess is healing, lie carefully on the affected side, until he is healed.
de la brisure dou col	from the break in the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes there is a break in the neck bones, and it can bend; and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, pay attention if you see his hands becoming soft, swollen, and numb, and he cannot move them or straighten them, and when you prick him with a needle, he does not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is deadly in many cases, and if he is unable to move and feels pain when pressed or pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the disease is healed, if one applies treatment.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar condition occurs in the spine of the back, and you want to know if he is healed or not, pay attention if his feet are swollen, and if the signs are in his hands, and there is flatulence and urination without willing it; and when he lies on his stomach, there is urination without willing it.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is lying on his back and he wants to sit up, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	You should know that it is deadly; therefore do not labor in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to him, then the case is less serious.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that you apply a hot poultice to the spine if there is an abscess, or rose oil, or the yolk of a new egg, until it is soothed; then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and he must not sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is exposed, it must be covered with a bandage; and remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a single stitch, then treat it with ointment in a bandage, until it is healed; and if there is broken bone, which is called the "bone of the cow", grab your left-hand little finger with your right hand, then apply the plaster and bandage it on, if you need to; then bind it, and if there is exposed bone, sew it up, remove it, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It occasionally happens that the hip bone is fractured, and if it does, there will be some lessening at the top; and they hurt for a long time, and decline towards the sides, and the patient feels pain in the area, and there is swelling where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it, so that you are on the break; and know which end of the bone is broken and its shape; and if the break is at the top only, then put it back in place, so that it is in its natural shape.Et s’il est au chief et a li parmain, si met cele qui es a li parmain a sa natureil figure, tant qu’ele soit au chief; et s’il est a li parmain soulement, si met cele qui est al chief a sa natureil figure, tant qu’ele soit a li parmain.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long, or it declines inward, then let the patient lie on his stomach, so that the restoration of the break is prepared for him.Et s’il est dou lonc et decline au pardedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son costé tant que cele brisure te soit aparillie.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, then apply the ointment, and then place a wooden or leather splint on top, and hold the fracture steady so that it does not move; and apply the area below the ribs, until the color is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if painful abscesses arise, do not touch them until the painful abscesses are soothed, and apply what we have previously mentioned; then return to the restoration, and hold it as it should be, if there is no bad incident; and that is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The acromioclavicular joint is what is between the collarbone and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of two methods. One method is that you take a stick of medium thickness, according to this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Tie both ends of the stick with two strings, and bend them upward, and press the patient down on a seat; then pour the broken arm over the stick, so that it comes to rest at the bottom, and press one curve of the stick inwards, and then bend it downward over some heavy object or by the minister extending it downward; then place the broken joint together in alignment with his hands, until the fracture returns to its proper position.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that one supports the patient on his armpit and ties his hand to his neck; then command two ministers, one to hold what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other below to hold tight from underneath with one string, each pulling their respective ends.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more difficult, then constrict the ligament below the fracture, and above it, and extend each of the ministers to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is close to the head of the shoulder, then you should put the ligament in the middle under the shoulder joint and the other towards the neck, under the fracture; and likewise, if the fracture is towards the neck, then it is necessary to put the ligament lightly without exertion, as long as the fracture is even on its location and on the neck; then put the fracture evenly as it should be, and constrict it, if no abscesses come about.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if a hot abscess comes, do not drain it until the 7th day, and put soft linen in ash and rose oil on the hot abscess until the hot abscess is soothed; then drain it, and the way to drain it is to put the ointment on the break, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put the cloth, and drain on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its place, unless something moves it, or if the bone is moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone will move, use splints, and put on the break a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have between each splint 1 digit of space, and let each splint be as wide as it passes the break by 3 digits on each side; then drain over the splints, just as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the break, more strongly and less in moving away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the setting of the stars, and the restriction, as we have said, at the time that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the hot abscess, then leave it to heal until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine the bandage every three days so that itching or swelling does not come to the site, or the pus cannot reach the member because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If you follow these instructions, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents occur, then do not remove the bandage until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and place under the shoulder a pillow filled with wool of equal thickness, and examine every hour during the day or night to ensure that the figure of the broken member does not move, or the bandage become softened; then heal it through the power of medicine, and give him the food we mentioned earlier, in such a way that the food is at its most subtle; and when he begins to recover, let the food be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to be wrapped for 40 days; and then one must loosen them and administer a bath and ointment medications to direct the area.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stricture is ugly and swollen, it remains unloosed for 50 days or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the break in the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm consists of two bones, which are called the "ulna" and the "radius." The ulna is smaller and located closer to the armpit, while the radius is larger and situated below the small bone. Sometimes only the large bone breaks, sometimes only the small one, and sometimes both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, their restoration and healing is easier; but when the large bones are broken, healing is more difficult and painful than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small bone is broken, one should gently straighten it and make it even.Se c’est li grans fosciles qui est soulement brisié, si doit on le poc estendre fort, et le mettre de la longueur que li petis foscile a; car il ne peut estre de la longueur du grans foscile, se il ne veult aler a piere.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the great artery, then it must be compressed more strongly; and extend it on a cushion, and hold the arm above the others, and the little fingers below the other fingers, and let the patient cross himself over his chest, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that he suffers no labor; then extend the assistant's upper arm to the part under his hand, or to the artery, and another assistant above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then put the needle in equally according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it is broken into pieces, let each be placed in its own position, and if any are displaced, hold the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make an incision on the bone as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the breaking there is a wound, I have spoken of it in a particular chapter; let the cure be taken from there.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if at the beginning of the restoration, hot abscesses occur, then apply a dressing made of rosin oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft; and lay the dressing gently on top, until the hot abscesses are soothed.Et si li apostemes chaus ne voulent mie apaisier, si lie li drapeil subtilment et le piege soit fort, pour que li pus ne se puise pas en la veine.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the cerote and apply the plaster made from the powder of the mill with an egg, and then put on the splints, and let the splint for the fracture be a little stronger and a little wider than the others; and know that there should be six splints on the arm in various positions: whether the fracture is in one of the bones or in two; and apply more pressure over the fracture than elsewhere, and always less as you move away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the bandages over the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and let the string used to apply pressure be made of flax, neither too thick nor too fine, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And then re-examine the limb and the bandage after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, you should moisten the limb with warm water until the itching is relieved; and let the limb not be tightly bound but allowed to rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then begin the stretching again, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones separated, and similar things, then address them.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you perceive that the nutrients cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you must loosen it a little and leave it like that for several days, until the nutrients flow to it, and then tighten it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said come to the patient, then do not release him until 20 days have passed.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Or if it does not improve, then place your hands around his neck and keep his head level, and guard against movement and agitation, and let him sleep on his back; know that this broken neck will be healed in 30 days or 35 at most, and sometimes even in 20 days, depending on the different dispositions of the complexions.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that in the back of the hand and at the base of the fingers there are few fractures, and they come only with great force many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, then the patient should sit upright and straight in front of him equally; then put his hand on the stretched towel, and stretch the minister the broken bones, and put them even ministerially, so that they are well joined; and put the plaster and the poultices, if abscesses do not come, then put a cast according to the quantity of the place; and let it be wrapped in 1 linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is in the peritoneum around the abdomen of the plant, make a sphere of fabrics, and instruct the patient to hold it against his broken plant; then hold it with a long strip of fabric, and let the pad be of woolen cloth as large as the palm of your hand, and hold it, as it should be.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the furrow, you should put a pad on top and another underneath the plant, so that the hand is open and straight; then tie it all around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture is in one of the fingers, whether it's the thumb, hold it straight and even as it should be; then hold it with the plant, and if you see, put a small straight pad to raise the fracture, and do not move it; and if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the index or any other, hold it even, and tie it with the finger next to it; either tie them all together while holding it, which is better, or put a pad on top, as in the thumb; take care in the restoration and in the application of hot abscesses, and treat those that occur, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The thigh bone is often broken, and one can see this when it turns forward and backward; and its restoration is with one ligature above the fracture, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then extends each ligature to its part equally; and that is when the fracture is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the thigh, then let one ligament be towards the armpit and the other under the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is near the knee, then let the ligament be over the knee, and make extension downward; then put the splint as long as his two hands, making the bone even with its natural position, then put on the ointment, and the bandage, unless an abscess comes there.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let him calm down and then return to your work and treatment; the ligature is made in such a way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap around the fracture a bandage of strong linen doubled into two or three layers, and thus keep the superfluous parts in check; then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the toe, and pass a long thread between the thigh and leg, below the knee, and have the end of the thread above; then return to the leg and thigh the bandage, then place splints on top of the fracture, and put a splint on the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and thigh with soft rags to make the pressure even, then begin to tie tightly three turns or four on the fracture; and as you go higher over the fracture, lessen the pressure; then feel the two threads that you have passed between the leg and thigh, and tie three splints that are above, then return below to the end of the thread, so that you come by the foot; and make the pressure so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus so that no abscess or swelling or anything similar comes.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes, then loosen it, and treat what comes out of it as we have said many times before; and if there is a bone fragment protruding, then one must remove it if possible; and if not, then one must split the area and draw it out, and treat the wound as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thigh is broken like this when splints are put on, as in the shoulder and arm; nonetheless, the malady is not cured by this treatment.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the hip is restored within one day, or a little less or more, according to the variations of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the joint of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the joint of the knee there is little movement, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is only a fracture, or a perforation, and it affects everything, whether injured or not, and everyone feels it.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is to put it back into place as it was before, with its bones aligned so that they can be set; then apply the plaster, and if necessary, use a round splint, and bind it as it should be, then follow all the instructions we have given for other fractures, such as hot abscess and similar conditions; then treat each accident as appropriate, until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is properly called the "mustelz", and the other is called the "foscile". All injuries that occur in the arm also happen in the leg, and their treatment is the same as for the arm. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns completely inside out.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if only the small bones are broken, then it turns forward.And if the shinbone is broken, it turns backward. And if the thighbone is broken, it turns outward. And if both are broken, it turns inside out.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it clearly; and it turns inward.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	So bring about extension, and make it equal, and bind the joints equally. But still, if the fracture is ugly, and there are several pieces, then the extension should be less and gentler; and adjust it according to your skill.Et si li brisure est en la cuisse et ne va pas sus a la hanche, si n’est grant dolur, mais il n’y a point de mal, car on le puet aler et ruser, et selonc sa guerdon se met a la veine; et s’il y a mal, si est dolur, et il ne puet ruser; et se li esteles sont desaloiez, si ne puet aler.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two wooden splints which support the leg on both sides, and which are as long as the leg from the knee down to below; then wrap two bands around them, one above and one below, and tie the middle also, and at this time the leg will not decline to the right or left, and so it is well; and some administer a board as long as the leg, and it is of wood, and they place the leg upon it to prevent movement, and properly they do this in the fracture where there is pain; and move the leg each day to see if there is any hot abscess or other accident; and treat it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but at times there is a fracture of the bones of the foot and of the two bones, and there is only bruising in various positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if it happens that the bones of the foot are broken, and you see the bones sticking out above one another, then put that foot on the ground as if he wanted to walk, and then put your foot on top of his, where the bones are raised up; then press them until they return to their places. Then put the ointment and bandages on top, and place a small wooden board with two smooth sides underneath the belly of the foot, and then bind it tightly to the foot in a suitable manner, and then wrap clothes around it, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And after three or four days have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones healed, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the toes are broken, then set them as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place a splint according to the length of the toe, and let it be a little wider, then place underneath the foot that board which I have mentioned, and tighten it appropriately; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, then place on top of each toe a splint according to its size, wrapped in one layer of linen, and tighten the board underneath the foot; and let the top of the board press firmly against the belly of the foot.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, from what we have already said; and treat each case as it should be treated.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone of the finger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bones of a woman's nature are broken, make her sit with her legs apart, then lean forward to her lower back, and hold her from behind; fill the opening of the nature with cotton wool, and insert as much as you can; then make the woman stand up, and gently lift her back little by little, and the cotton will pop out, until it reaches the entrance of the nature, and the bones will return with it; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back in, and do this for seven days; then the break will be restored. If you wish, take a lamb's bladder, and tie a cane to the opening, and fill the entire bladder inside the nature; then blow into the cane strongly, until the bladder is inflated inside: the nature will return the broken bones; then it should be filled with cotton, and left like that for some days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	When the bone of the finger of man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said for the bone of the hip; and these breaks are not hidden from him who applies himself to this study and follows my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the breaks indicate in many ways the right way to restore them: understand this therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	When the penis is broken, take a goose's gullet and insert it into the penis; then wrap it tightly with cloth and leave it for three days or so, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as in the thigh or shoulder or similar, to be bled immediately, so that the bleeding we have described bears witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound bleeds, then apply vitriol again, if you have nothing else; then restart reducing the fracture in that same hour or day, if no abscesses appear.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses appear, then leave the reduction until the next day, as long as the abscesses are soothed; and do not touch them on the third or fourth day, because you would bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible on the uncovered chest, you should gently put it in place with your hands, with a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not apparent to you to make it equal with your hands, then reset it with this instrument made of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and its width depends on the size of the wound; and for this, the doctor needs to hold it with three or four fingers, depending on what he needs in each case of broken bone; and it should be smooth and slightly bent, so that it does not fold under pressure on the affected member during your work, and it should be thick at the front and wider from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called «palainche», because the curved head of the bone should be placed upon the prominent end of the other bone; and it is bound in one place so that it may return to its original position and be even with the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle and the instrument cannot hold the bone well, then you should chip away at the head of the bone so that the instrument can grip it.Et se li os ne puet rescevoir l’estrumens, si covient que tu tranches la chair qui le couvre, tant que li estrumens en ait possance; car il ne convient pas qu’il soit trop fort.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then cut it with an appropriate instrument, such as an incisor or scissor, according to your ability; then remove what remains in the bone of sharpness and tiny shards.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	So do this until it is in its place, then soak the cloth in black wine vinegar, and use it to cleanse the wound if there is any pus or other discharge; do not apply cerate or anything else to the wound that might cause pus and corruption to form; then administer leeches after you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered while wrapping the bandage around it according to the size of the wound; and be very careful not to restrict the wound with the bandage. And many fools have done this, causing death or corrosion in some cases; so make sure that the bandage is looser than others for dislocations.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is large and you fear that harm might come from it, as we have said, and there is pain in the area, then do not apply leeches to it; but wrap around the wound, instead of leeches, hard pieces of cloth, and tie them tightly.Et se li os n’est mie en son leu natureil, si covient que tu retorneis la dislocation et retorcheis li membres en son leu, et retorneis l’esguille sus la plaie, et laisse li drapeil tout descouverts; car il adut estre descouverts par journees et nuites, selonc que li chiés de l’aiutoire se guarisit.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days pus forming at the wound, then remove what you have placed over it completely, and apply an ointment that heals wounds, such as a four-drug ointment and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary to loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, as long as it is sewn up and healing.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And one must prepare the limbs in such a way that the bowstring runs smoothly and lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they go many days without healing, and it cannot be reset but keeps dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must probe the wound with a needle, and remove all the dislodged bone fragments that are causing the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula or any other type of corruption occurs, you should treat it according to what he said in the chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when a bone is broken and open on the limb, such as the thigh or shoulder bone, and similar large bones, do not treat it at all, for many times death results from treatment; leave it be until it heals over, which may take 20 or 30 days; then treat the wound if you can, and if you cannot, leave it alone.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of bruises that come over the weld
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come after the health of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and it is an ugly sight to see the shape of the limb; and by chance the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care then if the swelling is fresh: have the physician administer astringent medicines, such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others; crush one of these substances, or all together, and cook them in wine, egg white, or garlic; apply it to the wound as a poultice, and bind it on tightly for several days; then remove it and start another, until the nodule is removed. Or you can press it hard against a well-shaped piece of plaster; for the properties of plaster are such that it removes all inflammation from the limbs; if the nodule has turned to hardness like stone, and needs to be cut out, then scrape it away, and reveal the excess growth beneath; or have it removed by some scraper until it is gone and healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb that is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is healed and the limb remains weak and slender, it happens for many reasons: one reason is that it was bound too tightly, and not as it should have been; or because there were too many ligatures, and the nourishment could not reach the limb; or because of excess swelling; or because of excessive movement, not at the right time; or because there is little blood in his body, and so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and soften the body, so that the blood is multiplied within him; and administer a bath to him, and give him joy and relaxation; then apply pitch to the limb, so that the pitch attracts to it greatly, and moisten often with warm water, so that the attraction runs into the limb; and restore it to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the limb bent after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limbs are bent after restoration, and the broken bones appear, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function; do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb completely anew, and many fools have done this in our land; and these practices are blamed, and great harm comes from them, and even death; nevertheless, if the dislocations and torments are fresh, they should be moistened with warm water, or herbs that soften are cooked, such as leaves of marshmallow, and roots, and melilot, and similar medicines that soften the swelling; and you make a soft plaster, such as diaquilon well made, and you take the mucilage of marshmallow, and confit it with suet or fat of lamb, and make a plaster on it; or you take ripe figs, and crush them with colon dung, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the joint is dislocated by continuously rubbing with wet hands for a long time.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let there be applied motion to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is enlightened and hardened, like stone, and needs to be removed with iron, then it must be cut into subtly and lightly, up to the bone; and put poultice and study in the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs in someone, one should immediately try to reset it without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the place will become swollen, and if it is reset too soon, it can cause pain; many times it brings on swelling and other pains; nonetheless, when this happens, let the patient be bled, then let him rest until the abscesses are drained; then apply hot water and oil to the limb, then reset it gently, and treat each limb as the healing comes.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations from the head to the feet.
des mandibules	of the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Then the mandibles become dislocated and both dislocations are according to two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their place and made pliable, or they are completely dislocated and hang down towards the feet, and saliva flows from his mouth which he cannot hold in, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped around by speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it will return to its proper place through many remedies.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is complete, then you must reset it quickly and without hesitation; and in such a way that the assistant holds the head of the patient, and puts his thumb of one hand into the mouth at the root of the jaw, if the dislocation is on both sides; and let the other fingers be straight, in order to apply pressure equally; and instruct the patient to soften his jaws and move them about.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And she keeps an even pace until she returns to her place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the jaw is dislocated, especially if both jaws are affected, apply hot water and oil, and gently manipulate them until they return to their proper position; do not use force in this manipulation, as we have already instructed.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back into alignment and the mouth of the dislocation is closed well without softening, then place it on moistened cloths made with rose oil and wax, then tie it gently with soft ligatures. Let the patient sleep on his back, and let his head be supported between two cushions so that he does not move it to either side, nor strain to yawn, but take light food until the pains are relieved and the mandibles are healed. Then he may eat whatever he wishes lightly, and not strain to open his mouth to eat or drink as long as the mandible is well bound and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be put back in place within an hour, and are not converted to their places, then fever and usual sores come, and by chance, intestinal problems, and by chance, vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is destructive; and many times, the person to whom it happens dies within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceless cannot dislodge the constriction within the continuance of it and of the foot, and is dislodged sometimes by force, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	The restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then press the dislocation firmly with your palm, and it will return to place; then apply the plaster and bandage, and tie it tightly; and the shoulder joint near the neck cannot come out of alignment; if it does, and comes out again, reset it as we have said; then apply the plaster and bandage, and tie it firmly, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed. Thus also is the shoulder joint reset when it has become dislocated from its place after being struck.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	You should know that the shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: one is at the bottom part of the axilla; the second is at the foot part; and by chance it dislocates at the top part, which rarely happens; and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inside for the nerves; and often it dislocates underneath toward the axilla, especially in those who have little flesh, but in those who have enough flesh, it dislocates with a pop and goes back with a pop.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men that they get a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore, you must test it until you are certain, and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And you will know it is dislocated when it is down toward the axilla, and there will be a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them an obvious difference; and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and underneath the axilla at the top of the shoulder, as if it were a hole; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move in any way; and also, if it is dislocated upward, it is not hidden, for you will see it obviously at the top; and this type of dislocation is not difficult to fix when it is new, or if the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is for the assistant to lift the affected hand up, then place their fingers under the shoulder, and lift the joint forcefully upwards into position; while the assistant lifts the hand and extends it upward, then lowers it back down; this will bring quick relief.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come within a few days as we have said, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and they should be given soothing and softening ointments, such as a decoction of alder and fenugreek and mallow in water, and then they should be wrapped up; then the patient should lie on their back, and a piece of woolen cloth that is neither too soft nor too hard should be placed underneath the shoulder, and then the minister should place their heel on the cloth, and gently lift the top of the shoulder, and pull the hand of the patient; and another minister should hold the head of the patient so that it does not move downward; in this way the shoulder will return immediately, and if you see that it is not returned according to this method, then you should have a man who is bigger than the patient stand upright by their side, and put their shoulder underneath the arm of the patient, and lift the cloth upward so that the patient hangs in the air; and another minister should pull the hand of the patient downward toward the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the dislocation is too light, one can use a heavy object with it, and the dislocation will return immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And one can reset it in another way also: one takes a long rod and sticks it in the ground, so that the shoulder is as wide as the palm of a hand, but not too thick or too thin; then it is placed under the patient's shoulder, but there should be a cloth under it, and the patient must stand upright with his arm outstretched; then his hand is extended downward on the other side, and the joint will return to its place immediately; and if it does not return through all these things that we have said, then perform this cure: take a rod two feet long and four inches in diameter, which has a round head to fit into the socket according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then bind it with soft cloth above the shoulder-blade so that the shoulder-blade does not hurt the patient; then put it under the shoulder of the patient, and stretch his arm out along the length of the brand, and bind the shoulder to the brand, and the arm at the tip of the hand; then let the arm hang down, and the body lean to the other side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, however it may be, you must put under the shoulder-blade a woolen ball the same size, then apply the prepared ointment of flour-mill powder, with incense and egg white, all over the shoulder and around, then stretch it under the shoulder-blade gently, and return the bandage over the ointment, and embrace the hand at his neck, and let the arm remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he eats little, until the member is healed, for he will heal faster; and then eat more after five or seven days, and move him; and if he is stiff and not softened, then he is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has come out of place due to moisture or any other cause, one must administer cautery at three openings, as it is described in the chapter on cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this and the joint still dislocates after seven days, and the shoulder cannot be raised upstream, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is torn or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be firmly set in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocations that are towards the bottom, at the breasts, or behind, are made by pushing and stretching with the hands, and one should treat them until they are healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing, there is pain in the limb, and with movement, use the bath many times for the patient until the pain goes away and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	about the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You should know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated by pins, and it returns by pins; and if it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not reset, for one can see and feel it well, and it dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick neck with the healthy one, then you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is crooked, and cannot bend its arm or touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must reset it when the abscess has come out, for if the abscess comes out, then it is painful to reset it; and by chance it cannot be fully reset, especially when it is in the back; so it is worse than other dislocations, and causes more pain, and death may result.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it can be reset, that you extend his hand with your two hands; and let his arms be spread out, and his hands bent according to the joint, inside and outside and around, and press the joint at his wrists together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he bends his hand toward his hand, and presses from the root of the palm the joint that has been dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, then it needs a strong extension; and while two ministers extend the arm, and hold it with their hands so that it does not move during this extension; then they turn the arm from each side, after having wrapped a long double cloth around it; and when you have joined the joint in his hand, then grease it with some oil to soften the joint, and then press it firmly into place, until it comes back into position. And when it is back in its place, put on a dry plaster with egg white, and hold it tightly in place, and keep the arm attached to the neck of the patient for several days, then loosen it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in place, he removes the poultice and leaves it; and if you see that the joint is not set well, then restart the poultice and bandage, and leave it for several days until it is firmly set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels stiffness after the joint is moved, and it does not move, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is eased; or put a fat sheep's-skin on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and have him enter the bath; and when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the skin back on, and enter the bath again; do this twice or three times until he is healed.
li dislocation de la main	dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand is healed, and its return is lighter than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place gently, in the same hour that it was dislocated, so that the joint is swollen or an abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	The method of moving it is to place the affected hand on a table and extend the fingers, then examine how the hand is placed so that the palm rests on the knuckle joint; press it until it returns to its proper position. It is necessary to check if it is back in the right position, then place the hand of the patient on a table with the palm down and extend and move the fingers.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then let the patient lie his hand on a table, and the operator should place his hand over the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it comes back into place now, that is good. If not, then strain it with soothing plasters and leave it as it is without manipulation.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after several days, then let the joint remain crooked; and it does no harm to the patient as long as his hand is relaxed, and he cannot grip anything at all: then know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries; there is nothing else to be done except straining with cautery below the injury, and by chance nothing else is needed.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, then put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then squeeze and let go for .v. days, then loosen and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is any swelling, then wet it with warm water and rub it until it is healed.Et s’il advoit que li nerfs fussent copez, si puet il estraindre par cauterie, et frotter li sembables plasters sus le leu qu’il fut copez .
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the handEt s’il advoit que li nerfs fussent copez, si puet il estraindre par cauterie, et frotter li sembables plasters sus le leu qu’il fut copez ..
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the knuckles of the hand are dislocated on either side, sometimes at the back of the palm or on the inside; then you must pull the finger and push the dislocation towards the joint, and hold it there for a couple of days, then straighten it that same day; and do not ligature it, as we have said before, and loosen it at night, and make it move, and put a ligature on again during the day; and do this often until it is healed. Do the same also when it is dislocated in another place.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	dislocation of the shoulder blade from the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder blade or neck is dislocated, there is no treatment, for death hastens the disease.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the egestions jump out without any will, and he cannot hold them in, and many times a limb is paralyzed, either both legs or both arms, or one; and often there is a twitching in four parts; that which twitches at the back is called "gilbositez"; the cure is that you should investigate whether the gilbositez came from childhood: if it did not come from childhood, then there is no cure or healing for it.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient writers described at great length, but there is not much benefit in them all; but I have abbreviated it according to my understanding, and have devised instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that there is no cure or health in the gilbositet that comes to the front foot, and also in that which comes directly on both sides; but one can only be cured by that which comes directly on the back, as I said; and it is that the patient be stretched out on his face in one place evenly, and have a strap underneath him so that he does not twist; then put one tinder at the head in the ground, and another at the feet, and tie a cord under the sores of the malady, and another at the hips, and knees, and ankles; and two servants should hold the cords, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the tinders; and they should be tied firmly, the tinder as we have said, and the minister should put his palms on the spine, so that it recovers.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return with this treatment, take a table three yards long, and lie on your side, and let the patient be on their side, and place the end of the table under the wall, then put the middle of the table on the spine; and let the patient put their feet on the other end of the table, and press hard, until it returns to its place; and if you see fit, do it while turning to the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And you should insert two torches at the head of the patient, one yard in length, and towards the feet, two others; and between each torch, have an inch of space above and below; and let there be a hole in each torch, through which the string runs, and let the torches be firmly in the ground so they do not move; and between each pair of torches, let there be a turning torch, over which the strings turn, and let there be two small torches on each turning torch, one inch in length, for turning the string; and then tie the string that is among the pulleys to the turning string towards the head, and the other string towards the feet to the other turning string, and each of the ministers turns their string to all the string, and the master puts the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is equalized, then apply a desiccant plaster with plenty of egg white, and then toweling, and then the cast of a tablet three inches long, which colors the area of the hunchback and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage, as we have said, and use a subtle cooling medicine on the patient until he is healed; and if anything comes to the surface at the end of the healing process, then one should administer softening and soothing medicines, with the cast that we have mentioned before; and sometimes they apply a piece of plaster, and sometimes the appearance comes to the surface on the back of the spine, and they think it is dislocation; and it is the bone that is exposed, so one must not be presumptuous about it: it might bring about death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	You should know that only dislocations occur at the joints of the hip and shoulder, and not as with other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and mostly inside, and less dislocated in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it appears longer, and the diseased knee protrudes more than the healthy one, and the diseased person cannot bend their knee to the fire; and the place which is nearby is swollen with a hot abscess because the head of the thigh comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the signs of those who it afflicts are contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of those who it affects in front are that their leg is straight according to its length; nevertheless, they cannot bend their knee without pain, and if they want to walk, they cannot, and they retain their urine, and the veins swell, and when they walk, they walk over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of those whom it affects behind are that they cannot bend or straighten their knee, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the veins are softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The remedies for this kind of dislocation are: if the dislocation is old and it persists according to its nature, then there is no treatment; and it must not be assumed that it will get better on its own.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for the one whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of the four kinds of dislocations, you should quickly return the joint to its place, and stretch it in and out, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will come back into place and require no other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, you must prepare a strong minister and stretch the leg firmly with both hands, or with a strap tied around the knee; and another minister extends their hand above in such a way that they press their hands under their knees, then the leader of the strap tightens it around the thigh; and another pulls on the head of the strap; and they all pull up and down simultaneously so that the diseased person is lifted off the ground once and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to the four types, and if the dislocation has been reset, as we have said, that is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, then one must apply treatment to its appearance. When the dislocation is in the hip, one should lay the patient on his healthy side, then tie a bandage around the root of the thigh and the part below the armpit; then let the bandage go up towards the armpit and the underarm; then have another assistant grab his arms and squeeze the large part of the affected thigh and stretch it outwards: thus it will return to its place. This manner of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot tighten it in the manner we have described, then one must tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong linen bandage around the heels and knees; then let the affected leg be extended two cubits more than the other, then hang from the end of a pole, with his arms two cubits above the ground; then command an assistant to grab the top of the thigh, and have another assistant hanging with the patient, who firmly grabs the thigh, for the joint will return quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is healed, then the patient lies down, as we have said in the case of the hunchback, and he pulls the ligament tightly on the affected leg, and also on the foot; then he puts two torches, one at the head and one at the feet, then he inserts the torch between the buttocks of the patient in the middle of the body; and he wraps wet cloths around it so that it does not blister the patient, then he extends each limb towards him, and the surgeon holds the dislocation equal to his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it relapses, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put him on the table and press him as we have said in the case of hunchbacks, and let the patient lie on his healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the affected leg slowly, and according to what I have said; and have the assistant put his weight on the painful shoulder, then press with the other hand, and push the leg down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is healed, then one should not extend the patient downward or lift him up, but he should be as if his hip had been dislocated and was healed while lying on his back, as we have said before; and he should lie on his face, and the ligament extended as we have said, and they must press upon the joint on the table; and it will be all right when the patient extends his legs and they are equal; then adjust the buttocks, and apply the ointment, and bind it with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and rest for 3 or 4 days, then release him and apply the ointment again; and if you see that they are equal, then bind as before, and let him rest for 3 days; then release him and let him walk well until the limb is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	Knees are dislocated in three ways: that is, on the inside, on the outside, and behind; but they are not dislocated in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the sign is that you command the patient to bend his leg at his thigh, and if it doesn't stick to his thigh, you know that he is dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit up straight, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his face, and put his foot on your feet; then take his knee in your palms, and pull between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee gently; and another minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he sticks his leg to his thigh lightly; and put the plaster on, and let the leg air at the thigh, and bind them together strongly for three or four days, then loosen it; and the patient should not work at all, until the limb is healed.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the member is not at all, then administer a very strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes dislocated, and sometimes fully dislocated, both inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it hurts when pressed on the affected part; the movements are light, and one should gently stretch it with their hands when it is only dislocated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely healed, you should make the patient stand upright, and hold his leg firmly by the ankle; then draw the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left, twice each way; then stretch it upwards, and massage it well in that position; do this twice as we have said, stretching and drawing up the foot; if it pops back in, all is well; if not, repeat the process, for it will return; if it still does not return, make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and push the peg firmly into the ground between his buttocks, and wind the cloth around so that he cannot move the patient; then hold the dislocation firmly with one hand, and another minister should stretch the leg at the knee, and the other minister should stretch the foot upwards with his hands or by the ankle; then stretch each minister evenly, and the peg should be pushed further between the patient's buttocks to hold him in place as he is stretched; then put the dislocation back into place with your hands, and another minister should hold the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is at a point, then apply the plaster and bandages on top, and stretch it firmly, and bind the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves which are on the ankle behind, so that the ligatures are not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligature becomes loose, then stretch it; then release it on the third or fourth day, and they should be able to walk by four days; and if he goes before that time, it is not safe that he will not relapse.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if painful abscesses arise, then you must soothe them as we have said elsewhere until they are healed.
des dois	of the arms
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the arms are dislocated, one should stretch them gently without force, and this is a minor matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any part of the hip or foot, then you should make the patient sit on a flat surface or table straight up, and put your foot on what is open from the joints, then press down on the foot firmly until it pops back into place; and when it is even, and there is nothing open, then put a board with two prongs under the sole of the foot, then stretch it firmly, and leave it for three days, then release it; and let him rest until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When dislocation comes with a wound and you want to restore it, many patients die: so do not be presumptuous in the treatment if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for long, and if you are not kind and merciful and patient, nor bold; and at first use warm poultices for abscesses, and leave the patient in God's hand if you see no hope of recovery; but if you see hope, then reset the limb to its place, so that the hot abscesses may come out; and when the limb is in place, administer warm poultices to soothe the wound, as it should be, with drying ointments; and if there are fractures and small broken bones with the dislocation, set the bones and do as we have said for simple wounds; and beware of falling into fear, as I have said, for this will cause changes according to your Creator, and for the safety of your soul and body.
Amen	Amen
