O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, very dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the knowledge of medicine together with its fulfillment, and I have made the end through its expositions and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hands, namely surgery.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of the hands is neglected in our region and is foreign and unknown throughout, its knowledge has perished and been cut off, and nothing remains of it but the slight descriptions found in books by the ancients, which our hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity, closed intentions, and knowledge has been removed.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Now it seems to me that I will animate it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the tools of cautery, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation for it, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good hand-masters are found in our time, the art of medicine is elongated.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for one who undertakes this to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as long as he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and veins, and the number of ears, and the movement and of the blood vessels moving and resting, and where they come from.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And Hypocras says that what is known by name is little, but what is known by action is much; and the same is true in the art of medicine.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned earlier, be careful that he does not fall into error and harm people; just as I have many times seen several of those who meddle in this science and then abandon it without knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish doctor who lanced an abscess of scrofula on a woman's neck, and he punctured the arteries in the neck; therefore so much blood flowed out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another doctor treating a man's hernia stone, and the stone was large; he took with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.Et vis un autre qui traït une piere de coliche d’une femme et li estraignia les intestins et la vessie, et le fust mors en  .iiij. jors.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if they cut it out he would certainly die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another patient who was treated by a doctor from our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture he had a wound; and the ignorant doctors tightened the fracture on top of the wound with strong pressure, and did not leave any padding on the wound, and left it with a lump; and they ordered him not to move it. And he remained like that until his leg, foot, and toe became swollen and came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and loosen the leg; and when I loosened it, he immediately felt peace and no more pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	However, the corruption had already set in the limb, and I could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to spread throughout the limb until the entire limb was destroyed.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another doctor who punctured an abscess that was swollen, and then it became inflamed due to the maliciousness of his lord.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For when a ulcer is free of melancholic humor, one should not touch it with iron unless in such a place that one can completely remove all that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear son, you need to know that the work of the hands is divided into two parts: namely, work where there is danger in various situations; and I will show in each part of this book where there is danger and peril.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	It is necessary that you guard against this, so that the foolish crowd cannot speak ill of you. Take up your arms in caution, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave behind terrible diseases of grief and illness; and take off your armor from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may pass from this world to the other one of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in some of his warnings: "Do not take on a disease unless you are called by the foolish crowd.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have arranged this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medical cauteries, and it is ordered from the head to the feet; and about the forms of instruments, and the tools for cauteries, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and it includes the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus, as we remember the work, it is appropriate that I describe the nature of each temperament and its harm.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of temperament and harm are the longest subject and most subtle science, and the secret responses; and the majority of sages spoke about it, and agreed on this: and I am content with their words, for I desire brevity.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery helps universally in all complexions where there is matter, and there are .ij. complexions: namely, hot complexion without matter, and dry complexion without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions, some people have said that cautery is very helpful; while others say the opposite—that cautery does not help illnesses that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	Because the nature of fire is hot, it should not be treated with heat or dryness; and those who say otherwise, that cautery aids hot and dry illnesses in the human body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the human body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found this to be true through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And nevertheless, let no one meddle in this except those who have tried it and who know through long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and their outcomes and the timing; we fear not at all the other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the doctors agreed and concurred about the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that cautery with fire gathers up the secrets of cures, and is of greater goodness than burning cautery of medicines.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and it does not spread beyond the cooked member, nor harm any other member unless named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Burning medicines pass from one member to another by moving away and bringing illness to the member of grief; and it may kill the patient The fire, because of its high heat and the goodness of its substance, does not do this if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found through experiment and through the length of service and study that I have devoted to the art, and have placed above the truth of things; and for this reason, I excuse myself from the length of speech, because it does not please me to take away the secret that is reserved for fire, and the quality of its work, describing how it cures diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in his demonstration. So receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed upon what time cauteries should be performed, and chose their days.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harmfulness underneath is removed by the aid of cautery; and likewise if the cautery is for necessary pains that are forceful and urgent and cannot wait until greater harm comes to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear son, as the foolish believe; for the illness that is healed by cautery does not return; and they say it thus: but it is not so as they think, because cauteries are not medicine that moves the complexion, and dry the humors that cause the pain, and are worth more than medicine for their swiftness, and for the virtue of their action and their lordship.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the illness comes sometimes according to the complexion of the disease and its location and its strength; and are assembled in it the excesses through the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered where there is little excess and moisture, as with tooth cauteries for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but that rarely happens.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine; but it is true, yet they do not believe that cauterization works after medicine has failed, but their intentions are false, and cauterization is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment for any illness and they fail, then we apply cauterization, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauterization with gold instruments is gentler than with iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and its high value; and they said that cauterization does not cause swelling, but this is not true, as I have experimented and found that it is true in some people.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet when you heat the gold instrument, you cannot tell when it is hot by its color, and it cools down immediately if overheated; and they heat it in fire, and there are many hazards.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this we use the fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or I have ordered this chapter from head to foot, so that the way is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of the olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and coldness on the head, and there are two types made due to a condition called "soda", and due to many humors which descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for numerous ailments such as pain in the teeth and throat, and especially for all conditions arising from coldness, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar maladies.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the patient be purged by a cleansing, dissolving medicine for 3 or 4 nights, depending on what the strength, age, and condition of the patient can endure; then have the head of the patient shaved.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then have him sit cross-legged in your lap, and place his hands on his knees; then place the palm of your hand between his nose and upper lip, between his two eyes; and where your index finger points, there will you apply the cautery, which is called "olive-wood", of which here is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the spot marked with ink, and move your hand up and down while twisting; then lift your hand gently, and examine the spot to see if you can see a small bone; and if you do not, reapply the cautery as I have instructed until you see the bone. Then take a piece of silk, place some soft cotton inside it, moisten with butter, and apply over the spot; let this remain until the scorching is healed; then treat the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients say that when an open wound remains uncovered for longer, it purges more; and for this reason, they advise the use of leeches.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some say that one must let the cautery burn so long that a part of the bone is burned, and then one can heal what has been burned in the bone.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one must let the cautery burn so long and press so hard that one reduces the bone as much as a woman's finger, so that the humors may issue forth; then one should leave the wound open for a long time, after which one may heal it and dress it.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of cauterization do not seem good to me in all things, except in some people where there is a way of fear; and I think that I should leave it, for the shoulder is weakened by continued solutions of nature, as we testify in other members; and likewise when the shoulder of the patient is weak from nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more safe and mild for me, and with this I work together salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When a chronic headache comes to the whole head and lasts a long time, the patient should use herbs and pills that are called "cochie", and purgatives for the head, as well as oils and plasters; and if they perform the cautery we mentioned earlier and it doesn't help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the sick person is not of a cold nature, and that it is not too cold; then cauterize it with that fire cautery a little as we said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	Afterwards, cauterize each horn of the head up to the bone as we said before, and make one cautery in the place where one uses leeches; there is a place for leeches on the head; and lift your hand so that you do not go to the bone: the patient feels much more pain with this cautery than with others, and I will speak about it later; and the cauteries on the horns should be thinner than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and this is how to do it:
dou cautere dou chief	of the cautery on the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain arises in the head and the disease extends to the eye, and the shoulder is purged with purifying medicines, and all other remedies that I have described in the division of diseases have been applied without success: then make cauteries according to two methods, namely with hot water and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery with hot water is that you take an onion, remove the outer skin and coat it with honey twice, then make a poultice of it and apply it to the area where the pain is located in such a way that you can place the onion underneath the skin; and when it has been applied, bind it tightly and leave it for 12 hours; then loosen it and draw it away from the onion, and leave the wound as it is for two or three days; then place a linen cloth soaked in butter over it until suppuration occurs.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the wound has healed, if you see fit to use any burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth chapter on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The cautery with iron is performed as follows.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery to the appropriate temperature:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "cauterization" because the head is made in the form of a cowl with a slight curve, and in the middle there is a small opening; and he places it over the painful area, and holds his hand and slightly turns it so that half the thickness of the skin is burned; and he lifts his hand so that the artery does not burn, which is a bad omen, and blood flows profusely.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	Afterward, put cotton in the wound and leave it for three days; then he puts moistened cotton on the wound until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this wound with the knife-like cautery, do so at the very tip, and be careful not to touch the artery in this wound which is not old.
de emigraine	of wound
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat wounds as we have previously discussed in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cauteries we have previously mentioned in medicine and fire do not help, then you must heat the cautery called  "cultellare" until it is white; and draw a line half a finger long over the painful area, and lift your hand once, and press down so that you do not touch the artery and so that the blood does not flow to the bone; and be careful of the mandible so that it does not close when one chews, and the nerve has no effect on the patient, and spasms do not occur; and be careful of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, and cutting causes great fear in someone who is unaware and inexperienced; leave the wound open halfway; but I will tell you how to stanch the blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you the place where it opens in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on the extraction of an artery, with the cautery that has .ij. knives; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of ear pain from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When ear pain comes from cold, and one has applied dissolving medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not go away, then heat this cautery, which is called a «point», of which this is the shape:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pricking all around the sick ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and move a little above from the root of the ear where you have marked the site to be cauterized; and there should be .x. points around each ear; then treat the site until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	There is no cautery for the torture that comes from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not use cautery on appearances that come from dryness and nerve spasms.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this appearance of torture that comes from moisture and fluids, and if gargling and purgatives for the head do not work, then you must cauterize the patient in three places: one cautery at the root of the ear, another a little above the temple, and the third where the two lips meet; and apply the cautery to the area that appears healthy, and also cauterize the top of the ear just below the corner of the head, and another cautery on the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery in place until half of the brain is burned; and this is the shape of the cautery tool:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the same as the scalpel we described earlier, but it should be a little more flexible and the blade should be a little thicker; then treat the area as I have described before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but it does not help, and the patient has a fever, then do four cauteries: two on each horn of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one at the place called "vasselz," as we said before; and do the last cautery over the mouth of the stomach. Treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	of litharge
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient large pills and cleansing powders for the brain; then wash the head of the patient thoroughly, and apply the mustard plaster described in the section on plasters to the back of the neck; and here is how to do the cautery: perform it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is healed thus, it is good; and if not, do three cauteries in the middle of the head, descending to the neck, with a distance of one finger between each cautery; and cure him as the others, and if you see fit, and the patient is suffering, do one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two more on each horn, and cure him as before. Let the cautery be that which is called "olivare," as I said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of coldness from the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to cleanse the head of hair and other matter as we have said before; then raise the patient's head, next cauterize in the head and on each temple, one behind and three upon the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, he should be cauterized four times on the spine of the back; then let it be until the heart's heat is felt, then lift your hand; afterward, dress the wound until it is healed, and use the cautery called "olive oil" as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cauteries except those who are phlegmatic; first, cleanse the brain of hair and other matter as we have said in the section on great and suffering illnesses requiring medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot bear it, make him gargle and chew, purifying the brain often with good meats; then the king's head in the middle, and do to him .i. cautery according to what we have said before, and .i. cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the illness is fierce and suffering, make cauteries as I said for paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the illness is in an infant, make for him 1 subtle cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When through the cause of melancholy there are corrupted humours and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with those cauteries as we have said for paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if through the cause of melancholy the superfluities are declining towards melancholy, and the body is moist from the illness, then give him something to drink by which the brains may be purified, according to what is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you have treated the head of the sick person; then make a small torque out of linen well made, as a circle, and put it around the head; and the sick person must be cross-bound, and be held tightly on all sides; then bring forward the poultice, and apply moxa made from old sheep's wool; and heat it gently with fire, so that he can bear the heat; then remove the circle from within around the head, and let it cool; and do this for the sick person once a week with good management, until he is healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or, if you wish to cauterize it all over, make many points on the entire cautery tool.Et s’il li cauteres fu si cald que il fust de chauffe, si qu’il ne puit demorer sus la plaie, et qu’il la brulast, si covient le refreidre en aigue froide.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This cautery method softens the brain immediately; afterwards, place cotton wet with butter and goose grease upon it.Si li cauteres fu trop froid, si covient le chauffer encore, si qu’il soit cald sus la plaie.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When eye problems first arise from the signs I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that cleanses the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make him sweat in a bath several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he commands him to raise his head, and cauterizes the scalp, and makes two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the eye is from both eyes together, or one if it is from just one; and covers all the cauteries throughout the veins and arteries that are under the heart, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of bleeding, and if you see too much blood issue, stop it as best you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and the incision, the cauterization: sometimes cauteries or fire are made under the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	where the body weeps
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears are old and habitual, and are on the veins or within the arteries that are visible on the outside of the head; and one sees that it is from cold phlegmatic superfluities, then he makes the cautery which I said earlier for the descent of the eye: one cautery in the scalp, two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or fires under the two bones; and if there is a need for more, he cauterizes bleeding above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	with tears from within them
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat him according to what we have said in the division, and he does not improve, then give the patient 3 nights of poultices; after that, bleed the head, and cauterize with an olive-sized cautery; and make two cauteries called "clavilis" on the two sorces, one just under the hair; and be careful of the artery so that you do not cut it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the membrane of the eye is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery which is called "olive oil.
de coi ci est li forme:	Here is how to make it:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see two warts on the same finger as long as the warts are; and do not leave the hand except that one-third of the paper is burned, according to the manner I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that pokes the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes the hair in the eye is converted to the parched state, and pokes the eye, and they perform cauteries according to two methods: that is, with fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a healthy state; after that, mark on the paper their shape, which should be like the leaf of the bay tree, and let the beginning of the sign be among the hairs; then moisten cotton with egg white and mustard seed paste over the eye, then heat the cautery so that its shape is:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing over the shape you marked little by little many times, so that it burns in the right spot; and the sign of the health of the eye is when you see the paper pulled away, and the hairs lifted at the edge of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it like this for 3 days; then moisten cotton with butter until the scorch is healed; after that, treat with ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterward the hairs come back and the paper is softened, then start the cautery over that same spot again, just as you did before; and if the hair falls out, then cauterize it until the paper returns to its natural state, and let the hairs grow back even and not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make on parchment the shape of the bay leaf; then take French soap and live coals, each a 1/3, and grind them together well; and make it quickly so it does not cool down, then spread it over the shape you made like the bay leaf, and put it over the hairs; and if the disease is in one eye only, then work on that one, and if both, then likewise; and put under the eye cotton moistened with egg white; and let the patient's hand be in a healthy state, and place your finger showing over the medicine, and press a little and move it every time the patient feels biting from the medicine, for it bites like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the bite has passed, lift up the eyelid, and examine if you see the membrane raised as it was by the constraint of fire or by incision; and if so, all is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, then apply more of the medicine to the eyelid or where the medicine has not worked, until your efforts are equal and the eyes are set right; then moisten cotton in butter until the burn is cool, then treat the eye with the ointment called "diaphenes" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to be very careful in your work so that the medicine does not get into the eyes,
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterward, and the hair pricks in the eye, then restart the medicine on the area that has been softened by the paper properly, just as you did before; after the cure until it is healed; and this is the shape of the bellows of the myrtle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of people are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this, your constraints should be; and do not rely on the right way for one who has studied this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you are treating a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not helping, then you should use cautery according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap; and have an assistant hold his head between their hands so that he does not move or lower his head; then moisten cotton with egg white or pepper juice and place it over the eye; next, heat the cautery which is shaped like a feather quill, with one end pointed and the other blunt; although the blunt one is better for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open, treat it and dry it out; and if it is closed, open it and draw out any pus towards the bowel; then place a hot cautery on it carefully, and hold your hand on the cautery near the eye socket so that your hand doesn't move foolishly; and apply the cautery to the fat of the eye socket, corrupting it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery just to the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then restart the cautery again, and if you need to, do so once more, and let it be for three days; afterward, place wet cotton on it, treater with a desiccant ointment until it is healed, and if 40 days pass and it is still not healed, then apply medicine of corrosive water until the bone is exposed; and treat according to what comes up in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way to do a cautery for a fistula that some ancient ones said:
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	He examines the fistula and inspects its location; then he inserts a sharp instrument into the opening with which the shape is formed.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make it the size of a bean; and hold your hand on the thread firmly so that the patient does not move at all, so that the molten wax does not enter their eye; and one should place wet cotton soaked in vinegar or oil over the eye, the wax will reach the source of the fistula, and heal it miraculously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we have described, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, one must apply an incision to the navel and bring the fistula into the body of the navel according to what is appropriate in its own place.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cracks occur in the lips that are called "hair," and especially in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you heal these cracks as we have said in the sections, and the cure does not help, then heat a small scalpel according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And he applies heat to these cracks until they come to a head; then treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When the abscess occurs in the root of the throat, or the uvula, or the palate, or the roots of the teeth, and it causes a pustule and rot and becomes a fistula, and you treat it as we have described in the section on incisions, but it does not heal: then you must use cauterization according to the size of the fistula. After cauterizing the opening of the fistula, hold your hand steady so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it and affects the area underneath; do this once or twice, after treating the wound as we have described in the section on cures, until it is healed. If it is healed by this method, well and good; but if not, then you must expose the site and remove any decayed bone, according to what you find in the affected area.
dou movement des dens	of the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it does not help, then put the head of the sick person in your mouth; after, heat the cautery which the form of the tooth will come next in such a way that you place a cane on the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside, holding your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after, lift your hand and reapply the cautery according to your will; after, fill the mouth of the patient with warm salt water, and let it sit for an hour and spit it out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way, the tooth which was moving is now stabilized, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of dental pain
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When dental pain comes from coldness, or there is coldness or whiteness, and treatment with medicine does not help, then there is need for cautery in two ways: cautery with butter and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery with butter is such that you press butter from a cow, and the end in a spoon of iron or bronze; afterwards take cotton and wrap it over the tip of a needle, and moisten it in butter, and apply it to the aching tooth until it cools; and do this often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that the butter moistens the wool and cotton, and apply it to the aching tooth, and place hot iron over it until the fire reaches the gum of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Together with fire cautery, it is such that you take a bar of iron or bronze, and it is thick so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient. After heating the cautery, with which the form comes later, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this often, because the pain will be removed by the same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary for the patient to fill his mouth with good butter in the haste of that cautery, and then he spits it out; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And you can make the cautery from any part of the body that you wish, according to what you have the ability to do; and this is the shape of the needle:
des scrophules	of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula is of cold moisture and does not respond to medicine, then heat the chafing dish so that the form comes, and there are two openings for the smoke to emerge from the cautery on the other side; place the hot cautery once upon the abscess where it is needed, so that it reaches the bottom of the abscess; if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; afterwards, apply moist cotton with butter until the burn is healed; then treat the site with ointments and bandages until it is cured.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of scrofula:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture prevails in the channels of the lungs, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient should first be cleared with solutive medicines; afterwards, apply cautery to the root of the throat, and be careful not to approach the throat itself, only burning slightly near the heart.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that he should do another cautery at the joint of the neck and head, and let it be the cautery called "clavicle," of which we have spoken before; and cure the area as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	of the tooth
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all diseases of the lungs are from cold moistors, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is old, then make two cauteries on the breast in their usual places; and another cautery between the two breasts; and let the cautery be called 'clavicle' according to the form that was previously described.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see it, do cautery at the tip of all the cautery that is called "points," of which the form is described above in the disease of the ears; and let the points be to 30, or as many as are needed.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After that cure the area according to what is said above, and let the cautery be in 3 rays according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because these cauteries are lighter, you do three at a time.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation:
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, stroke the patient on their back and sides; then, gently lift the testicles with the fingers of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery with two fingers until it is hot enough. The shape of this cautery instrument should be as follows:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	then cauterize the testicles until it penetrates to the cost, and the figure of the cautery will be four cauteries; and this is why the cautery with three fingers is made, so that there are six cauteries in total; and the nerves follow the subtlety of a tent, and this is the shape of the cautery instrument with three fingers:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is placed on this one nerve for which there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Afterwards, apply the porridge-like cautery with a cloth; then let the patient rest and not move the limb for a long time until he is well healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, then little will happen, so do cautery on the thick part of the clavicle cautery, or much of the cautery in points.Et s’il est desaloiez a bas, covient il faict cautere sus li pils de la jointure dou col; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «cervicale», ou de plusors rains selonc ceste forme:
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joints are closed, the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When chills and excess moisture occur in the stomach to the point of straining his complexion, and his cataracts multiply, and he is treated with familiar remedies without improvement, then the patient should be laid on his back, extending his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	Afterwards, make three cauteries on the sole of the foot, each the size of a bean, one cautery directly below the claw, and two cauteries on either side so that the shape of the cauteries has three angles, and there is a small space between them so they do not touch when they bend. The cauteries should be deep enough that both parts of the heart can be seen through them, and the shape of the cauteries should follow this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form; and he who fears this cautery, cauterize with a pointed instrument and sign on the stomach one point according to the amount that you want to go in; then cauterize with all the cautery which is called "poins".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure of the wound that we have mentioned before, until it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver has pain from cold and moisture and strong windiness, since it is removed from its natural complexion by excesses; and the patient is cured of this as we have said in divisions, but if it does not help him, then the patient must be placed on his belly; and three cauteries are marked according to this form, figure, and quantity on the liver, avoiding the hypochondrium, where the ribs of man come from; and there should be a distance between each cautery equal to the width of a thumb; and the cauteries should be long and thin from the body, and do not press your hand hard at all on the cautery; and only half the chest is burned, and the patient must lie straight on his back; and if he cannot, then he must lie down, and stretch his legs, and lift up his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you wish to cauterize with the cautery of silver, be subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not scorch the heart, for you would dry out all the body; and let it not go all the way to the bone, for the heart is very delicate in that place, and you can tell by looking.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know whether it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the pain felt by the patient is not too intense; but if it is in the membrane, the pain is violent.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then when this treatment is applied to the eyes, the patient should be reclined with his head lower; then sign with oil on the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar in shape to a raisin, for that is how the mark appears.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize with the cautery until the ulcer is burned, and reaches down to the bone, until all the pus is gone; afterwards treat according to the treatment of wounds until it is healed; and no one should use this cautery except those who have studied long in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have sometimes been cured.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore he can confidently operate, but in any case it seems better to me to leave it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	with cautery for pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should make cauteries for pleurisy from roots of aristotle, and in such a way: take a long root of aristotle, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and as thick and as long as your finger; and moisten it in oil, and press it to the fire, and cauterize .1. cautery between the armpit and the collarbone, and .2. small cauteries a little lower down on the side that is under the beard; and .2. cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, declining slightly backward; and 1. cautery in the groin, and 1. another one over the stomach, and 1. between the two shoulders, and 2. at the sides of the groin, avoiding the cautery that is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but do it smoothly as if applying a perfume.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And some ancients say that some people use a cautery like a razor, heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; and although there is pain with this, as we have said in the liver abscess,
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this operation there is fear of death for the patient, or a fistula occurs which cannot be healed.Et si li home est de nature froide et melencolique, il doit avoir grant paour, car il n’est mie en sa nature que fuir le danger; et si li home est de nature chaude et sanguine, il ne doit pas avoir granz paors, car il demande la vie.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you cure the disease of the mouse in the way we have described in the sections on cures, and it does not help, then there are three good ways to cauterize:
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of these there is a way such that you make three cauteries, or four, by lining according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not press your hand at all along the cautery, and let the patient be careful on his back; and another way of cautery is such that you heat the cautery which has two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the heart which is in the place of the mouse, or the sides of the disease come towards the left, and let the elevations by which you lift the heart be according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cauteries be according to the breadth of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	Afterwards, I put the two nerves into the flame until the heart is pierced on the other side, and then pull away the cautery; and thus there will be four of them. And if you wish, you can cauterize all along the cautery with three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the wound has healed and scabs formed for a long time, it is better than the other wounds mentioned before.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization does not work on syphilis, except in the manner called "asclytes.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods we have described in detail, and your treatment does not help, then you should perform three cauterizations around the navel, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the groin, two on the back near the spine, and one on the buttocks; the cauterization should be close to the bone.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	Afterward, let the cautery open to drain pus for a long time, and do not leave the treatment of the wound after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the two intentions will be together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly should be the key that we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is shown there before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet of one with syphilis are swollen and filled with yellow water, you should cauterize between the little toe and ring finger on the top of the foot; move your hand with the cautery without turning it.Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, thus blocking the yellow vein; and let the cautery be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After making two incisions on each leg, one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg, apply two long cauteries with a scalpel; and leave the cauteries untouched for a long time without dressing until the pus comes out; then dress the other wounds as we have described.
de la menoison	of the moon
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When diarrhea comes from cold and moisture, and the retentive and digestive powers in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by usual means; and you see the patient suffering greatly and very weak, then make one large cautery on the stomach according to what was described earlier for the stomach cautery, and four small cauteries around the navel, one cautery clavicle below the navel, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the patient suffering from abundant moisture, make a cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each elbow, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the cautery is beneficial when there is good circulation.Et si li est trop de moistors, et tu vois li sang en isse par la ventrez, fai l’incision sus la ventrez par le mi-cau, car si li sang est de la ventrez et non de la veine, il ne sera pas mist, et li malaide soit mort.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are in the anus, one or more, and are old and consist of thick cold moist corrupt humors, and are treated as we have described in divisions, and it does no good, then make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that which is completely outside below the armpit in a triangle, and cauterize underneath the jawbone two times; and if you think his stomach is cooled, and the meat doesn't cook, and one sees the face swell, then cauterize the face greatly over the stomach, as was previously described, and the other over the liver, and the other over the mouse with the full cautery of a key; and leave the cautery uncovered for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After curing the area until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshy growth called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you apply the cautery, heat it until it looks like a razor, and then place it directly on the shaven skin; hold your hand so that the cautery reaches the vein's opening, from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of skin, cauterize each one as we have said; after this, treat the wound with healing ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the scrotum, it will provide greater relief.
de plaie mal curee	from wounds that were not properly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot tolerate cutting or opening, as we will describe in its place, then such a disease comes that it cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a person has a fistula, and it is suppurating and oozing pus and corrupted moisture, then you must test it with a thin needle, and be careful that you know how deep the needle goes.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heat the cautery which looks like a razor, and insert it into the fistula according to the amount that the needle entered, and repeat the cautery until the pus and corruption are burned, once, or twice or thrice, according to the amount needed; and be wary of burning the nerves that are nearby, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	if the fistula goes into the bladder and intestine, then be wary of those areas, and only do this on fleshy areas, and think that it is not painful; after curing the area until it is healed, and if the area is swollen and the matter is not expelled for a long time, then know that the area is completely healed; and if the matter is not expelled, know that the joint is broken, and the bone at the bottom is damaged; and thus as one of those we will say in their place.
de la maladie des reins	of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When the pain comes from cold and is accompanied by strong winds, and does not subside in a woman, then you must apply cautery to the kidneys on both sides using the chisel cautery that we mentioned earlier. If we cauterize it in the middle, there will be .iij cauteries in a row, and they will provide greater relief.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and flaccid due to cold and moisture, and the patient retains urine, then you must apply cautery to the part above the bladder where the hairs of the pubic region begin, with one cautery on the right and one on the left, and each cautery should be as long as the nail of a thumb. And you will do one cautery above the back, or two if you see the need; and the cauteries should be chisel-shaped as described earlier.
de la marris	of diseases
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the disease is cold and moist, and does not allow conception, and the flowers are corrupt and their terms late; and when they come, they feel great pain: then one should make 3 cauteries around the womb, as we have said in the cautery for the bladder, and 2 cauteries on the back; and let the cauteries be on the clavicle, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moistors descend to the box of the hip, and due to this they move out of their place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the places of the departure are hollow, then one should cauterize the patient on the box of the hip with 1 cautery resembling a circle, and sign before the place around the box as it turns, so that the box is within the circle; and let the cautery be like those by which one has cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not available to you, then make three large cauteries from the olive tree, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the sores; and treat it until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain arises in the hip joint due to cold and moisture, and the disease is chronic and resistant to the treatments mentioned earlier, then you must purge the patient of the gross humours with foul-smelling pills or similar good pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After him, let them cauterize it; and there are two ways of cauterization: one is with burning remedies, the other with fire.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cauterization has many methods, one of which is as follows: make three triangular cauteries on the pelvis according to this shape, and make them deep and large, with a distance of a thumb between each cautery; sometimes a cautery is made in the middle of the hip, so that there are four according to this shape.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, the cautery with the circular cauterizer that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circles contain the entire hip, and all the thickness of the skin is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done in sciatica when the pain stays in the hip and does not go down to the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it extends to the leg or foot, they cauterize where he feels the pain in two or three places with what is called a 'point' cautery. And if the pain spreads to the big toe or near it, they cauterize where he feels the pain, three points or four, on the left side of the ankle; and it should be cutillary cautery, and burn the thickness of the skin; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two of the foot, they cauterize where he feels the pain in three points with what is called a 'point' cautery.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is necessary, make more; and if he feels that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, make the cautery with a knife or circularly, and take good care in all your cauteries not to leave the cautery on so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause the patient greater harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who had cautery applied to the ankle of the foot, and they left it so that the leg was completely swollen, and the foot as well, and it was pierced and corrupted throughout the foot.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a stomachache which caused his death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, apply cautery in one and then the other, according to this method.Si li poilz sont grans et lons sus les guiles qui sont pres de la cheville dou piet, et qu’il fuille par eu sang, fai li cautere sus li guiles pour qu’il ne puet demorer en li guiles, car il fuille le sang.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the hairs are large and long on the shins which are near the ankle of the foot, and blood flows from them, apply cautery to the shins so that it cannot remain in the shins, because blood flows from them. And the wise men say about the cautery for the hip, whose method is this: make an iron tool which is at its tip as large as a pea pod, or a little smaller, and it should be serrated on both sides, with the spaces between the serrations being the width of a thumb joint; the serrations are to be on both sides, and they are to be like fingers, and there should be a handle on the tool well made; and this is its shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it should be heated until it is all red and glowing, and then one should place it on the joint of the ill hip, and turn it onto the healthy side; and the cautery iron should be used once with one cautery rod and left for three days. Then make a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the application of ointment as long as it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its sight, and we see few who use it; and yet it is one of the good cauteries, which those who can bear it should use where it is needed.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cautery of medicine burns if you make the instrument to interlace in such a way that the edge of the door descends, and it is made of brass or iron with one side long, and in the height it has two knobs, and between each knob there is the thickness of a thumb; and they are open at the bottom and above, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	Afterwards, place the box of the hip on the patient lying on his healthy side, and then press your hand hard on the box of the hip; afterwards pour between the two circles of hot wax which has been heated in the fire for a moment, and let the patient endure the heat and burning for an hour.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For there is biting in it as well as burning; and when the bites are over, remove your hand with the instrument and raise the hip gently with mild wax, and leave it thus for three days, and apply butter until the blackness of the scald is removed; and let it be for three days so that pus may come out; and this would be the final aid after the treatment of ointments until he is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, do to them the instrument that dyes in salt according to what you did in the hip joint; and this is how hot salt is made, and I wrote it down in the treatise on the rectification of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, as much of each, and grind them together and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Then place another well-sealed pot on top of the first pot, and put alkali and chalk and soft salt on top, so that there is about two fingers of powder above the powders after you have pressed it well in your hand; and let it stand thus until it draws off water and pieces into the sealed pot, then take all that salt and pour it over the chalk and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then there is much pain and it is relieved by various medical procedures and cauteries on other members; For it does evil work like fire, and also has other medicines with which one cauterizes the hip well, such as thistle and honey of anacardium and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a cure by which a man was cured of pain in the hip and sciatica, and he praised it highly, saying that no other treatment was used, and that he was cured in a single session when this cure was performed, and then he bathed as he instructs below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he describes how one should take green and dry litharge and grind it finely with a little grease, and apply it to the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is located, and then cover it; and leave it for three hours, removing it when the patient no longer feels any burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	Then he makes him enter the bath until his body is a little heated, and he makes him enter the bed, and the pain will go away completely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such cautery medicines unless it is after the evacuation of bodily fluids.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's dung, it helps a lot; and the cautery must be done in such a way:
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take wool and grease it with old oil, and place it on the hollow between the big toe and the one next to it, which is called the Fossette.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After that, take dried goat's dung and heat it in the fire until it turns into charcoal, and place it on the wool, leaving it until it burns out; do this repeatedly, and don't stop doing so until you feel through sensation that it has reached the hip and the pain has stopped; and this method of cautery is called "goat cautery.
de la dolor dou dos	of pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes in the back, from sitting or impact or from excessive evacuation, or by similar appearances of cold matter, none of these appearances are worth cauterizing except for that which comes from the diffusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is fitting, after the patient has been purged with foul pills or similar remedies, that one should make three marked lines on his back where the pain is located, and in each line .v. cauteries or more according to the strength and amount that the patient can endure; and the cauteries should be performed according to the cautery called "the point"; and if you wish, perform .iij. cauteries or .iiij. with the medium cautery needle according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a tight back when they wake up, and fear; and you find it in the last vertebrae of the back, and in us it appears on the other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see one and see it treated, then cauterize it with a cautery of celery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery purple stains each part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery two or three lines apart, and have the points close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	Afterwards, heal the site until it is healed according to what we have said, and be careful not to use cautery on any part that is swollen and in the swelling of a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pains are from moistors that are spread throughout the body's limbs, and when pain comes in the feet, which they properly call "podagra," and when it is from a cold cause and cannot be cured by medicine, then it is cured by cauteries in this way: make the mouth of the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-colored according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is a need to prick on the sole of the foot, do cautery with the whole cautery that one calls «point.»
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, do cautery on each knee with three or four cauteries in each part, with the whole olive cautery; and if you need more, then do more, but do not hold your hand there any longer than until the skin of the heart is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and back, administer the cautery we have described in his chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make a point around the wrist two lines; and if there is no more pain in the arms, make a point on each joint and on the palm of the hand; and if the pains come to the armpits or shoulders, cauterize each part, and make good management for the sick person and take medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give him good care and purge the phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rot of the scrotum
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the ulcer comes in wounds, and the bowels descend to the testicles and it is new, then when you see him being treated, he should not eat that day; and he should use things that loosen the belly so that the farts descend from his belly; then make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his armpits so that the bowels are repaired, and bring them back to your fingers, and sign with ointment underneath the ulcer on the bone of the wrist, and throughout a sign that is similar to half a circle on top of the body; then heat the cautery from which this form comes:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it becomes white and oozes pus.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bones to their place; and have the patient keep his hand under so that they do not return; and work well into the thighs of the sick person, and put a pillow under the thighs and a servant on top of them, and another on the feet pressing down with hands; then put the cautery over the wound all the way to your fingertips, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, do it again until you reach the bone; and be careful that the pus does not leak out when you do the cautery so that you do not burn him; and through this the sick person will not die, or become worse.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to the size of their ears, and for large people as large according to their size; after three days, treat the site of the cautery with butter until the scorching is healed; then treat it with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days so that the wound is well closed; and it is necessary to let their hair grow long enough that it covers their neck when they lower their head.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wants to get up, if a well-made brace is provided for him and worn for another forty days, and he has good rest, eats and drinks little, and avoids excessive laughter, then he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say hereafter about the cure for cutting in his scrotum.
de la routure dou ventre	of the bowels
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ulcers come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they are not growing, then do the cautery with the fire according to its quantity, and burn the third part of the skin; after the cure according to what we have said; and some of the ancients say that one should cauterize it with a three-pointed cautery according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the place of entry and make a line across the width above the ulcer, and another across it, and hold your hand steady throughout the cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and gentler.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in a limb, from falling or injury, and the pain lasts a long time, and medicine does not help, then it should be cauterized with a cautery called 'sharp point', and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb, its thinness and weakness, and its position of twisting and pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is healed by the first cautery, that is good; if not, do another cautery on it, for such is the custom that it should move in the member nearest to it, therefore you must do the cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	from mixing
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	Sometimes ulcers are helped by cautery with great ease, especially those diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	When you see her cauterized, take care that the disease is in its early stages, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not stop or persist, and you doubt that the corruption may spread throughout the disease, then do five cauteries on the head: one in the middle of the forehead, and one towards the front at the end of the hairline; two on the temples, and one behind on the nape of the neck; and let your hand remain so that the cautery comes to the bone, and so that the vapors of the gross humors can issue forth; and cauterize the mouse according to how it appears beforehand.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the mixing is scattered everywhere and it is manifestly losing, then you should cauterize it with those cauteries that we have said on the head, and one cautery in the navel, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and 6 cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one on the hip and another one next to it, and two on the shoulders; and two on the elbows, and two on the tendons of the feet, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and be careful of the nerves that are on the lower calf bone, so that you do not burn them; and sometimes do a cautery on the bone of the wrist, and another one on the stomach bone, and one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more you do of cautery, the more it helps, and moves the profit; and know that the sick person does not feel pain from cautery as a healthy person feels it, because the body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and the joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	Afterwards, treat the place with wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes to a member and is treated with remedies, oils, and plasters but is not healed, then do cauteries on the member according to the size of the member; let the cautery be somewhat deep in the thickness of the skin; then cure it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes cautery is done on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that paralyzes the limb, and thus the swelling is removed; and nevertheless, no one should attempt this unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves moving through the body.
de albaras	of albars
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is awakened, and the remedies of medicine are of no avail, then cauterize it with a cautery slightly deep, according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin, so that the whiteness is removed, and its color changed; then cure with flour of beans and lentils, with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and blood of almond, of each one part; and mix all together, and tie it with a cloth, and air in the location until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the cure for cancer by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a ulcer comes at first, and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with the cautery that looks like a circle, all around the edge of the ulcer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And yet the wise say that one should also do cautery in the middle of the ulcer; and yet this does not seem good to me, for I fear it will be burned and corrupted, and I have indeed seen this happen sometimes; and a more certain thing is that it be cauterized around the edge, with the cautery called the 'circle', as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling which cannot be cured
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it is slow to die, either due to the excess that it causes or due to old age, when he is decrepit (that is, very old), and he has little blood, or because of time; and you see him hastening to die: then cauterize around with many small cauteries by pricking; afterwards leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see him piercing throughout the cautery, then heat the cautery tool of which this is the shape:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of that disease which is called  "adubelati" as long as the cauteries have pierced the skin, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels them piercing through in such a way that the flow of the pus is relieved.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Afterwards, treat the wound until it is perfectly healed.Et se li cauteres ne porroient pas percer li keur, tu le mets en tel maniere que li cauteres fieent entor la maladie, et les fies tout entor si com te plait a tu, car ele est resuivee par toua.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cure by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another type of disease is called "corroding", and it is nothing other than a melting of the limbs, for it melts the limbs just as fire melts dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a place that can withstand fire cautery, then heat the cautery needles both small and large, according to what is needed for the site of the disease; after cauterizing it all over, until you reach all the corruption, and none remains, so that all that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and apply soft bandages soaked in oil over the cauterized areas until the burns from the fire are healed, and all the corruption is removed.Et si li membre est corrodé a la fesse ou en alte parie del corps, il faut que tu le cauterises adonques et que tu le broies avec oile selonc la quantite de la maladie; et s’il est granz et pesans, si met sur les leus cauterizez soffres broitz a la maniere susdite.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the cure of ulcers caused by cautery.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after 3 days that a healthy blister has not formed, it is good; and if not, then restart the cautery on what remains of the infected area.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this wound is sometimes cured by a medicine blister instead of fire cautery; but nonetheless, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already described the cure for medicine blisters in the section on ulcers: take it whenever you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of warts that come on the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times, a condition called "clos" occurs on the feet due to excess moisture, and it is a large, faulty growth that blisters the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And there are two ways to perform cautery for this condition.La Iere est que tu prennes lou piet et le rases tres bien sus l’esgouttoir, et que tu esgouttes la pluitier; et que apres la rasura tu mettes une pierre chaude sus la pluitier qui soit tres chaude, et fasse que li piez se desset.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This is to know fire cautery, and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is when you heat the cautery iron as hot as a pen, and it is made of good steel to the size that it can touch the nail all around, and it has thin edges; after that, put it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail; then let it be thus for three days until it begins to form pus; then make a poultice of wild mallows, crushed with salt, and leave the poultice on all night; the nail will drop off and be uprooted by its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the place with ointment until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted to the body by defecation, and many times they happen in hands and feet, then you should administer hot water cautery; and it is in such a way: take a brass or iron rod, or a pen, and put it on the nail and the althelul, that is, warts; and place the rod on so that it blisters all around, then pour a little boiling water on it, and hold your hand steady, and press your hand as you turn so that the edge of the rod reaches the root of the nail, and can find the hot water a deep way to the root; and let the patient endure the biting of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will be uprooted at all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another, until you have extracted all those who are in the body; then clean the wounds that generate pus.
li cure dou trembler	the cure for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some people tremble from coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever, or from other causes, then you should do four cauteries, or four on each side of the spine, one cautery between each vertebrae; and one cautery on the foot, and one on the stomach with an olive-shaped cautery; thus it will cease the trembling, and hasten the healing from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of foul pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes they appear on the surface of the body as bad-smelling boils or pustules that come from putrid matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If necessary, when they first appear, a cautery should be applied to the top of each pustule: a thin cautery made from a twig of myrrh, whose tip is heated, or a long root of aristolochia, or with the lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, in this way, and they cannot grow further, but the surplus from which they come is disrupted, and they become healthy; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.Et si il appert des enquis, qu’il doit avoir l'un de chescune partie de la pustule, si convient que li cauterize soit fait en telle maniere: si adonques on le veult faire a la fust de mirte ou aristologe, si prenne la pustule et le fust en sa main, et le tienne près du feu selonc qu’il doit; et tant qu’il soit chaud, le prenne et le mette sus li chef de la pustule, et le tienne ainsi qu’il ne se remue jusqu’a ce que il le veult faire.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great discharges of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cautery of a limb, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to stop.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet, when this happens to someone, you should quickly put your index finger over the wound of the vein and squeeze it hard until the blood is calmed under your finger and no drops come out; then put in the fire olive-wood cauteries, both small and large, as many as are needed, until they are all red; then take .i., either a large or small one according to the wound and where the artery is running, and put the cautery on that vein where you are holding your finger, and hold it there until the bleeding is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it bleeds again when you lift your finger off the wound, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries which are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do this with one after the other until the bleeding is stopped; and beware that you do not burn the nerve which is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be well-stopped immediately if the artery is large, except by one of four methods which we have described: either by cautery, or by extraction when it has not been treated, or by strong binding with thread, or by medicines placed on it which have the power to stop bleeding; and it should be bound and compressed skillfully.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever applies a tight binding with bandages or placing hot things on it, or other similar things, if it does not help then it is no good.Et quant li sans decourt d’une artere qui est petite, et que ne pooit mie estre restenchiee de nule maniere qui nos avons dit, si covient que l’on le fie par medicines qui ont pooir de restenchir; et si le sans decourt d’une artere grasse, si doit il estre restenchiz par liement ou par cautere.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and they do not have any mirth or present medicine, then one should place their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and firmly press until it is constricted above the wound and above the vein; and one should not move it, but moisten it with cold water often so that it is very cold until the blood is congealed and swelled and constricted; and make inquiries beforehand about what they need in terms of cautery and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of treatments for wounds:
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about every disease that requires cauterization by fire, or burning medicine, and the poultices, causes, instruments, forms of cauteries; and I have covered that chapter from head to foot, and I will continue on the same path in this chapter so that one can more easily find what they are looking for.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so that I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you understand that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one about cauteries, and therefore one must be more cautious. Car li perils et li paors que on encuntre por les tailles de s’estomache, et les maux que il en advient, si com est la piere, et l’estracions d’elle, et les saings et les maux qu’on encuntre, et les estrumens qui conviennent, et les cauteres.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to embark on foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	Some come with diseases that they will easily die of due to the foolishness they display regarding their illnesses, and because of the great severity of their conditions; one must be afraid of these people.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And there are those who give you their opinion and say, "wait, I am healed"; but the disease is stubborn.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	You should not listen to those who approach you with such an attitude, but instead place more importance on your honor than on your desires. Do not act foolishly but wisely, based on what you know and can prove, and use prognosticating and diagnosis in treating your illnesses so that salvation may be found. This will help you gain a good reputation, glory, and praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, may Our Lord give you wisdom and righteousness, and if you wish to be inspired by the holy breath from his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Here I have ordered this chapter in discussing by chapters, according to what it is before the chapter of cauteries, which I have discussed from the head to the feet, so that you may more easily find what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Do you know that this disease often comes to children when they are born, and when the head is squeezed too hard during childbirth; and sometimes it comes from an unknown cause.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease in adults, and in all those that I have seen, death has followed; and because of this, it seems better to me to leave the treatment out of such cases.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose head was filled with water, and his skull grew larger every day until he could no longer support it; and he believed that the moisture would kill him, and this moisture is gathered beneath the bone above the brain, between the heart and the bone; and the treatment is such that if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should split a large opening in the middle of the skull; and it should be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture runs out; and see the form of spatumile:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscesses are larger, then make two slits in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs that you see are the openings of the skull on each side, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand from within, and it has not closed again: then you should split the skull in three places according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture forcefully.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Afterwards, tightly bind the cuts with bandages and powders, and apply wine and oil, and leave it thus for five days; then loosen it, and treat the wound by tenting and ointments, and let the head be extracted equally, and give the patient dry meat to eat, removing moisture from the pouch until the limb is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look at where the abscess opens, and the gathering of fluid; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	So cut where the abscess opens, and the gathering of fluid, and do it according to what you are able; and be careful not to cover the artery; and let blood flow, so that the patient dies from blood loss and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of gout
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to someone that they have a disease called "cataract" in their eyes or feet, and the disease is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the last resort is cauterization with which one will cut open the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you see them bent, have the patient lean back; then rub the area around an artery with a rough cloth until it appears, then tightly bind the neck of the patient with the entire cloth; then examine where the vein beats, and the locations of both are after the ears, and the pouches are pushed back; then mark the locations with ink, then bandage one and the other with a sharp spatulum in two parts, so that the incision reaches the bone, and this should be done widely from the back of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it, tie the bandage under the artery and over it, cutting also as two parts across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is bound, then the blood flows upwards continuously.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If the artery does not open to feeling, then you must measure the amount of space of three fingers, and cut from there down to the bone; and the quantity of blood that should be let out is six ounces, and perhaps a little more or less, depending on what the patient can endure, and the repletion of the artery; then examine the wound: if it remains over the bone with no sign of pus, then open the abscess so that it may drain, and ligate and dress the wound until it is healed.
de emigrainne	from grain
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old grain comes, and a catarrh occurs, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples, and ancient madness and similar things, and medicine does not help him through various methods of treatment, then we must cut the arteries in the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extraction is for the patient to pull back the hair from his temples, and feel for the artery which opens in the temple, for it will be evident by its pulse, and is not very deep in some people who are too cold; if it is deep, the patient should stretch his neck backward with a cloth, then rub the area with some coarse cloth, and moisten the area with warm water until the artery becomes visible; then take the spatulum, from which comes the shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	then peel the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then draw it upwards with forceps and divide it well from the tissues beneath in each part; and if the artery is delicate, cut it at the tip of the fingernail, then ligate that part according to the quantity of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, then the pain will not cease at all.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out blood from the vein, just to three ounces; and if the artery is large, then tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk so that putrefaction does not come before the healing of the wound, and let the blood flow gently; then sop up the excess fluid between the two ties in that same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with an iron cautery to the bone until the shoulder is cut through; and this is the main course of treatment if the patient does not have a fever and is of a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cautery helps to finish moistures; therefore it is of greater help for moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the wound with old cotton and places on it tents well made; and when they are taken off, they should be treated with dry medicines that cause charring, and with tents until it is healed; and if without cutting into the artery as far as you work, you hasten to cover by cauterization, or you employ vitriol and press it to your hand so that the blood is stanched; and if you do not have that at hand, put on the spot ice as long as the blood stops, and moisten the spot with cold water until the bleeding ceases, and then bind it as tightly as is appropriate; and what is better and easier in the extraction of an artery is to cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery of two parts, but the cutting edge should be well thickened to retain its heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too thin, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And you should have between the two knives a distance of a thumb's width, and then when you have burned in both places, you must put the hot iron on as far as the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and let the two heads be separated because they are not joined by this cautery all over; and this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When tears are flowing from the veins that are above the test of the head, and medicine does not help, and you see the face of the patient turn red, and feel pulsation in the forehead as if from trembling; and if the eyelids are drooping and moist so that the eyelashes have fallen, and the eyelids are scorched by the heat of tears, then this treatment is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called it in the old language "cure contused", and you should do for the patient who has this disease, cut the hairs on his forehead, then make three incisions on his forehead evenly according to the length of his forehead; let one of the incisions be as long as two fingers right through the middle of the forehead from top to bottom, and the other two at the sides above the eyes, and be careful not to cut the arteries which are at the sides above the eyes; and keep your hand away from the jaw, and let each incision be about three fingers across at a right angle to the first; and have ready a piece of sponge and a lot of cloth to wipe up the blood, then insert the spatulum all the way in where the pain is:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision on the temple all the way to the second incision; and scrape all of the skin in between the two incisions down to the bone, then do the same from the middle incision to the other second one, then remove this syringe.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	then insert into the first incision the instrument called a «cultellar», which is very sharp on one side and not sharp on the other, and this is how it is shaped:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the knife cutting towards the chest to the heart, and the sharp edge towards the bone, and cut as far as the middle split.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous to what opens in the chest, and then make another cut in the middle split to the other side; and then draw out blood equally, and press the site of the wound for the extracted blood; then insert a tent made of old cotton into each split, and apply wet rags infused with wine, oil, and garlic, and guard against hot abscesses coming; and on the third day loosen the ligature, and administer plenty of warm water, then treat the wound with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other remedies used to treat wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When someone has chronic cataracts, and you see their eyes are pale and small, and their vision is weakened, and the eyelids burnt, and hairs grow from them, and in their head there is sharp pain, and the patient sneezes; then know from these signs that these substances and this cataract come only from many veins, and the medicine used to treat it is like this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you command the patient to look up, then make a large slit in the forehead, and another one just below it.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begin from the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move the eye; and when the bone is exposed, then wipe all the blood away with a sponge, and then separate between the two lips of the slit and insert old cotton, and apply tenting with linen; then bind damp cloths soaked in wine and oil over it, and be careful about hot abscesses; once it is removed, you should rub the bone until new skin starts to form, then treat it with things that promote healing.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this way: take two parts of wheat flower, and four parts of colophony, and make an ointment from it; and administer it to the wounds to promote healing throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of ear stoppers
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of four things: grains, or insects, or minerals like iron, or similar objects. It could also be fluids like water, or garlic and similar substances.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it falls into the ear stone or any other object that does not adhere to the ear or grow in the ear, then hold the ear towards the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see a stone, then distil a little violet oil or oil of wormwood, and then administer the extraction. And make him sneeze with snuff, and stuff his nostrils when sneezing comes on, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and let the ear be at the top.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Stools often come out through this treatment. And if they don't, then administer the extraction by subtle pincers, of which this is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it dislodges with forceps, that is good; if not, then extract it with a fine, small pair of tweezers; and if it does not dislodge thus, make an iron hook and insert the tip into the ear canal firmly, and pack wax around the hook so that air cannot enter with the hook; then pull firmly upwards, for often this will work as we have said. And if it does not dislodge thus, take a leech in which to place some instrument made for this purpose, and place a bit of cotton around it; then press the leech against the stone or whatever it is, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it does not yield to all the things we have said, then hasten to split the ear so that the abscess drains, and there will be a spasm; and the method of splitting is that you first bleed the patient from the head vein, and draw blood according to its strength, then make the patient sit between your hands, and turn his ear upwards, and make a small split in the root of the ear at the fat where it hangs; and let the split be like a crescent moon as you come to the stone, then press it with all your might, and suck it eagerly with your mouth; and treat it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if there are grains inside and it is swollen, then administer an extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer a .i. subtle spatumile according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision on that stone.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think that the stone is moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then pull it out with subtle pincers and a suction cup, as we have said, so that the extraction is eased.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the water that goes into the ear, therefore, the patient should use sneezing of snuff first, and open the ear with old cotton wool.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	Let him lie on the same side as the ear with the infection.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps out by itself, that is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, take many small stones according to the size of your finger and heat them gently in the fire; then put one into the ear, and press on the other end with another stone, so that it presses against the stone already in the ear. Continue doing this with different stones until all the pus has drained out and the infection is completely cleared; and if you see any worms, take a piece of junk and insert one end into the ear, while burning the other end with fire until the worm is burnt; then do the same with another piece of junk until all the pus has drained out, as we have described for the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In extracting the object from the body, if it is small like a flea or similar, remove it as we have described in the previous section. However, if the object is large enough to be felt, use tweezers for extraction; this method is the most suitable for objects lodged in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	When treating earworms, after you have attempted the methods described in the previous section and in the treatment of distilleries, if the cure is ineffective, examine the ear in sunlight; if you see any worms, remove them with fine tweezers. If none are visible, take a small piece of wool and insert it into the ear canal; this will attract and trap the worms.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it is narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And insert the thinnest end of the catheter into the ear according to the amount of suffering from the malady, then suck firmly on the tube; do this repeatedly until all the pus comes out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not come out, then pack the ear canal with cotton as I said for an abscess; and if they do not emerge as we have said, then administer distillation remedies that the ancients have proven effective for worm removal, and you will find them in the tract on distillations; and distil your oils and medicines into the ear through this instrument, whose shape is as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it should be made of silver or brass with a narrow spout and a wider container for distillation; and for pressing the distillation into the ear, use a well-crafted instrument of brass, or take a razor blade and wrap the tip with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and any other medicines, into the cotton, and insert the cotton into the ear. Next, place the razor blade over all the cotton and gently press your hand to temper the heat so that the medicine is distilled into the ear; the patient will feel it working inside, and the distillation should be moderately warm as it enters the ear, but not too hot so that the medicine loses its effectiveness.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of ear stoppers
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without a hole in their ears, and the same thing happens to adults due to stoppers from a wound or something stuck inside the ear. Sometimes these stoppers push inward and become hidden deep within the ear, and sometimes they cause a slight protrusion that can be seen.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	When the stopper is hidden deep within the ear and cannot be seen, it is a difficult condition that can lead to various complications. In such cases, one should expose the affected ear to the sun and examine it closely. If you see the membrane bulging outward, then you must treat it in the following manner:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And it should be sharp and pointed both in front and behind, so that it does not pierce the ear. If the stopper is made of matter from the body or ear, then use fine pincers to grasp and gently scoop it out until all the matter is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the obstruction is deep in the ear, take a thin, small razor and heat it gently in the fire, then insert it into the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the itching which the sick person feels in their ear, pierce it gently and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the size of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this for several days until the wound is healed, or take a plug and moisten it in rose water, and powder with vitriol ground; and if you see swelling in the ear, then it is fitting that you pull out the plug and replace it with another plug moistened in cerotum made of olive oil and wax, until the swelling is relieved; then cure it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if there is bleeding, soak a sponge and a cloth in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other remedies that stop the bleeding that are used for treating distempers.
de la char des papieres	of paper charcoal
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This ointment comes in papers when they are moist and dry; you should then extend them with tweezers and pincers, and the tip of a spatula from its roots; then put powdered vitriol on the spot.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they are without skin, then cauterize them with a thin lens-shaped cautery, and the cautery after the incision helps; and many times they return, as long as something remains from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of hail
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times they come in paper-thin layers, things that look like gravel in shape and hardness, and because of this the disease is called 'hail', and it is a gathering of thick moisture on top and bottom; the treatment is thus: if the hail mutates from one side to another, and it is an easy thing to know, then open it up with a sharp knife, then peel off each layer gently, then pick it up with tweezers and burn it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot burn it without piercing the paper a little, then do not harm the patient; and if the split is large, then close it with a stitch, and cure it until it heals; and if it is small, then do not use force, for ointment will restore it immediately and heal the wound.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hives are descending inside the ear towards the upper part, then reverse the paper, and press them with tweezers; and if the paper is removed by incision, it does not matter; and when the hives are crushed, wash the area with salted water, and clean the place of that which causes pain until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that is woven into the paper of their eyes, and this happens more to children than to adults, and it is very painful to them; and they get catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears come to their eyes; and because of this, they lie down on their faces and sleep with their papers underneath their eyelids, which are moist and swollen, and the appearance of the exinach is covered by the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press it with your fingers and feel the exinach coming out.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient puts his head on the healthy person; and then take a .i. linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the form of a circle according to the quantity that exinach contains in each part, and then put it over him; and press with your fingers on both sides so that the exinach is gathered within the circle; then make an incision in the middle of the moist skin with a spatular blade, and do not make it any larger than the wound that is made in the healthy vein; and in various dispositions, exinach comes out of the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Take therefore a piece of cloth and fold it between your fingers, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out; and be careful not to press into the fracture so that you do not go all the way to the joint, lest you damage it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the bone does not appear at the beginning of the fracture, then push the fracture slightly open until it appears; then extract as we have said, then moisten cloths in vinegar and water, and place on the wound, and apply bandages tightly.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are some people who grind it up and put it on to corrupt that moisture which has remained.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the cure until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is a hot abscess on the eye, then treat it with soothing poultices until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	And if it has a cold abscess, use a hot poultice, and if there is swelling in the throat, let him go to the doctor until it is healed.
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow from papers, different than their natural state, and they are in a disheveled state, they harm themselves and bring on various diseases, like tears, softness of the papers, and albugine, leading to the destruction of the eyes; and the treatment is according to four methods: either by cautery with fire, or by an aqueous medicine as mentioned before the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and suturing or by means of canes, as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You should place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the paper of the eye to your left hand; if it turns, that is good; if not, insert a needle into the paper at the margin where the hairs are growing, and pass a thread through the paper from top to bottom, and turn it over to the razor; then make an incision in the part under the paper, under the abnormal hairs, starting from the great tear duct up to the small one; then remove the thread, place a small tent of cotton and linen underneath the paper, then mark on the paper a figure according to the amount you want to raise the divided paper.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if it goes to the person who needs it, cut off a great quantity of paper according to how soft the paper is; then make up the spatulum on the two lines that you have signed, and start from the large vein all the way to the small; and let one of the slits be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then stuff the cavity with one of the two angles of the heart, then scrape it all; then join the two lips together with a single stitch of fine woolen thread using a needle, and let the blood out, and make the excess threads dry on the two eyelids until they stick, if you see fit to do so; and if not, don't worry about it, then leave the stitch and the threads for three or four days; then cure the wound without stitches using dry and constrictive things, because the paper comes to life at the souding of the wound and its joining together, but the stitch is wounded (as the ancients say), and this work causes no fear; there is also another way: you draw the paper in a shape that is like a myrtle leaf, as we have described, with three lobes evenly spaced according to the form given here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut what is above with small scissors evenly according to the shape which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	If you cannot hold the tweezers and the wound is not even, take a needle and thread, and sew it up according to its shape; and take another thread beyond the large wound, and the second thread beyond the small one, and bring the threads together equally between your fingers; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin above which you have signed, as we have told, then bring together the two lips of the wound by sewing, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar soothing ointments; and sometimes the hair on the paper turns around: so you must use what we said about the incision; but the sewing in both is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of bones is as follows: fold the parchment and cut it according to what I have said, then make two cannulas as long and as wide as the spatumile; and tie two threads at each end where you hold the threads; then assemble them both subtly above what protrudes from the parchment, and extract the two cannulas from the two ends formed; and leave them thus for several days, and the skin which is being extracted will die and harden and slough off as it falls away.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it takes time, and the wound has force, then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is sewn, and if the paper is raised, and the hairs no longer weigh down; and this is the form of the two cane-wounds that you will make according to this shape, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	the procedures are such that you thread a fine needle, and insert a fine silk thread through it; then assemble the threads and tie them together tightly, and let the length of the threads be about the length of a palm; then prepare in the spatumile another fine silk thread, and tie the ends of the thread; then place the patient's head in your hand; and keep it exposed to the sun so that the procedure is not hidden, for this is a subtle and delicate procedure; then insert the needle all the way into the parchment close to the root of the hair, and draw out the hair along with the spatumile until it passes through the parchment, and thread the hair into the spatumile, whether there is one, or two, or three, or more hairs; then withdraw your hand so that the hairs come out through the spatumile and the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the scrotum is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then you will treat the scrotum underneath to the very end that you have prepared for it, until the scrotum comes out from the opening above and you see it through the eye; then you will treat the scrotum and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for 2 or 3 days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh grows over it; and if the hair is short, accompany it with a long hair from the horse's mane, and let it grow with that one which you leave, until it lengthens, and then you will pull it.
de la porriture de l’oil	from the pustule of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease called 'conjunctivitis' or 'redness' comes to the eye, there are two ways in which it occurs: natural and unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or cutting, or cauterization, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way to treat it is to split that swelling, and separate its edges, and put in tents of linen, and dress it until it is healed; and you must not use on it anything that dries and restricts.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do that, the disease will return worse than before; but you should use softening things, such as fenugreek; and rosewater or elderflower which has been steeped in water and the seeds of linen cooked, and ointments of aquilon melted in any oil, and it bandaged like this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the goal of your treatment is that you take care that it does not heal according to the form that it was before; and these works which we have said are not effective remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to the form that it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease, which is beneath, is truly called "axacrati", and it is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Accidents come from wounds and incisions and cauterization and similar things; the way to treat them is to take a needle with a double thread, push it into the flesh at the outer corner of the eye, so that the thread passes through both sides of the head, then pull the flesh up above the needle, and the skin wide apart.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper returns as it should be, that is good; if not, then take a razor and put it in the slit, and turn the paper over, and make two slits along the edge inside the paper; let the two ends of the incisions be at the two angles of the incision you made, and make angles so that when they are joined, the shape is like that of a letter which has the form of a "Y"; then remove that flesh, according to how much of it is underneath the paper, from what follows the paper; then join the two separated parts, and sew them with a thread of wool; then treat it as we have said with soothing medicines, and bandages, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a split or stitch or cautery, then you should make a clean split underneath the hair of the scalp, and according to what is written above; then separate between the two lips of the tent, as I have said; and one must perform the operation according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise master prepares remedies with all his power so that the shape returns to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what he needs in terms of treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	Sudden headache
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this soudure occurs in many people in such a way that the paper above is soaked with the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you should therefore insert the point of a razor underneath the paper and lift it up; and use tweezers to hold it, until you pluck out the hairs which are stuck in the spatulum, being careful not to use one that is too sharp or blunt, so that the patient cannot stand the pain of the too-sharp spatulum bleeding the eye; and make your incision, by which you scrape away this blockage, gently, so that the paper returns to its natural shape; and all of this assembly is healed, and sometimes in the eye there is a salt water, and it is relieved with sweet water and a compress; then place between the paper and the eye a tent made of linen, and apply to the eye wool soaked in egg white; and after the third day, use the collyrium and soothing remedies until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the fingernail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the nail is in two ways: it is nervous and resembles a hard scurf; and another that is not nervous but resembles congealed white moisture, which when touched with iron and pinched as if with tweezers, feels nothing. Both kinds begin at the inner corner of the eye, growing little by little until they cover the entire sight, light, and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of the incision is that the patient puts his head down, then opens his eyes; and hold the paper in your hand, then grip the nail with small tweezers and pull it up; then take a needle and thread a horsehair, or cow hair, or ox hair through it, doubling over the tip of the needle a little and pushing it all the way through the nail, then tie the nail to the thread and lift it up, then scrape the skin along the side of the nail from the cuticle to the quick, and clip the remainder at the root of the tear duct until you reach the thin membrane beneath, applying gentle pressure and leaving the natural membrane over the tear duct untouched so that the incision does not affect the flow of tears; and sometimes only the cuticle is lifted, along with the thread, as we have said. Then scrape it all along the thin membrane underneath:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful not to touch the fleshy membrane and break it, nor pierce the tear duct; and after the incision, apply a little powdered quicklime to the eye, and a bandage made of linen soaked in vinegar, and leave it until the next day; then treat it as needed until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push in the needle, and the hook will not go in, many times this appearance of a nail is cured with medicines; and they grow as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, so work the eye of the patient, and take the spatulum lightly hooked according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And gently lift the nail, and if you see that it is not lessening and the pus is pressing out, then distil from your mouth into the eye an ointment made of litarge and red copper ore, both ground together, and stop up the eye until the next day; then recommence the other treatment according to this same method, until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is nothing contrary in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then recommence the treatment as before, until it is healed.Et se li ungles sont lons et i poissent de l’oil, si distille en l’oil coliere fait d’un vairain et de litargire et de sel, et les i estoupe jusc’a qu’ils soient ostes; puis rencomence l’altra ovraige selonc ceste meisme forme.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the eyelid harms the eye with great damage, then stop it up with an ointment, and cut away a part but not all of it so that no tear fluid comes; then distil into the eye red ointment made of litarge.And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push in the needle, and the hook will not go in, many times this appearance of a nail is cured with medicines; and they grow as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, so work the eye of the patient, and take the spatulum lightly hooked according to this form:
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh which grows over the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	In some men, a red lump sometimes emerges from the eye socket, covering the eyeball and pressing against the eyelids, resembling a rose in a vase; then the patient puts his head down onto yours, after which you operate on the eyes, and press the lump with your fingernails, as appropriate, and hold it firmly; then cut open the first lump, and continue slicing until you reach the eyeball, being careful not to hurt the eye during the procedure; and let the incision be as described in the section on nail incisions, using gentle pressure to remove the lump, as shown in this chapter; once the incision is complete and all the lump removed, apply a mixture of red vitriol and similar corrosive medicines to the eye, and place cotton soaked in egg white over it to ensure a hot abscess forms; if nothing remains, and the white of the eye turns yellow, indicating a hot abscess, then leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with cooling remedies; then return to your procedure until the eye is healed, and do the same for any other lumps affecting the eye in this way.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, you should also consider the treatment of weak eyes by natural means, and of accidentally injured eyes by iron working; and do not put your hand to any of these treatments until you see that this member is suffering from that treatment.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of them
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Red veins which are covered over the eye, and obscure vision and weaken the eye all day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore, first you should examine the eye to see if there is anything else wrong with it except for the red veins; then he should lean his head back, and you should gently press the veins all around, using your wisdom to apply pressure gently and firmly according to their shape: the firm pressure should be applied twice as long as the gentle pressure.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two openings by degrees in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then squeeze the veins gently, and draw out the blood an hour after another, until you see the veins removed from the eye; and be careful not to hurt the eye with the points of the spatulae, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that you do not touch anything but the veins; and when you have done that, distill into the eye a mixture of green and red to corrupt what is left of the stye.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	If you cannot extract all of this in one hour, then make a poultice from things that soothe the pain of the eyes and leave it for several days until the pain is eased and the abscess is healed, then start again according to the method described above until it is cured; this is the recipe for the ointment:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the eye fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	Examine the "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with cautery and medicines that produce heat according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, there will be a wound in it where you must split open the abscess and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and darkness, then remove all of it with an instrument like the one in the current figure; it is called a "rough head" and should be made into a small, pointed tool like a file as shown in the present figure.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put on the site of the corrupt bone, then turn it between your fingers and press with your hand a little while until you feel that the corruption has been removed; and do this several times, then restore the site with drying medications.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	if the eye is swollen and red and the body of the bowel is swollen, and remains so for 40 days without relapsing or becoming inflamed, and nothing bad happens, then you can be sure that it has healed; if not, then there is only one other course which is to open the fistula at the nostril according to this procedure: you must then expose the bone a second time with an iron instrument, and with hot medicines, and when it is exposed, place an iron implement according to this form, with the head of the iron having three points, and the shank being tapered until it reaches the tip as you can see in the figure.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	He then places it on the bone underneath the eyebrow, and moves his hand away from the eye a little, then returns to push the needle all the way through the bone, and the patient feels it with the wind if he keeps his hand on his nose; then dry up the place with medicines as I have taught you, and when the flesh heals and hardens, look at the wound on the nose; this is easier for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the opening of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are fully open and there is no disturbance or thinning of the lens, you should bind the patient's eye; then heal it, then place leeches without burning to suck out the blood, then apply a poultice made from acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla on top of the eye, and then compress the eye with bandages and cloth; the way of using the cloth is to take soft cloth and double each one in four, then place them one on top of the other according to the amount that the eye needs; then compress it from above with a firm bandage, and start again with the leeches to suck without burning; then remove the leeches and leave the eye compressed day and night, and if the bandage becomes soft, you should tighten it; then remove the poultice after a day and a night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good; if not, start again with the poultice and bandages until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	from the rupture of a woven fabric
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in woven fabric, it opens and reveals something like a resin grain, and it is frightening to see. Therefore, if you see it covered, the work is such that you insert a needle into the root of the lower part up to the upper part, then insert another needle where there is a double thread in the armhole; and pierce it, and leave the first needle according to its position; then cover the area of the double thread and tie one part of the fabric tightly, then pull out the needle and place a soft lining on the eye, and leave it until the thread breaks with the fabric, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed. Sometimes the wound is restricted by the fabric in a circular pattern around the wound, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes give great appearance, then pierce them with a sharp spatulum which comes from the bottom of the eye, and corrects the white moisture and lowers the eyes, and enter in as soon as possible; then extract it until it is healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the bow of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but a tumor which is formed in the eye, resembling a descending ulcer, but it is not an ulcer; and the way to examine it is to make the patient sit on a straight chair, then take his head in your hands and move it until you see the tumor come up to your eyes; then it should be probed, and if the light does not shine through, and the patient can see things as he used to, then know that it is a tumor, but if the probing does not show what we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you cause the patient to sit between your hands, then take the spatulum and gently probe beneath the corneous membrane at the edge of the conjunctiva with the membrane and cornea, until the bowstring is released; and when it is released, distil into the eye hot water mixed with honey, or water or fenugreek boiled and honey, and then let it be treated with another treatment until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the eye waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have described the appearances of the diseases in the division, and what must be done to pierce them; now act according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	You should cause the patient to sit between your crossed hands away from the light of the sun, and press his healthy eye firmly shut; then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your right hand if they are on the right; then take with your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called 'almagda', or in your left hand if the eyes are on the right; then place the tip of the instrument near the cornea through the thickness of a hair at the edge of the white of the eye to the part of the smaller tear duct, and gently push the instrument called 'almagda' upwards, and turn your hand so that it pierces the white of the eye, and you will feel the almagda reach the empty space; and the measure of the path of the almagda should be at the bottom of the measure from the edge of the pupil to the end of the iris; this is the cornea of the eye; then you will see the bone in that paper through the clarity of the corneous membrane, and then push the instrument through one path after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	if the water now drains, then the patient sees the instrument before him and in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting a little, if the water returns up the second way, push it down with the instrument and when it is stuck in and not rising, then gently pull out the almagda by turning your hand a little; and then put some gem-water back into the eye inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then insert a wet wool pad or lamb's wool in rose oil and plenty of egg white into the eye, and bind it with clean cloth.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are from our time, put on comfrey powder mixed with plenty of egg white.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, because there are some people who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called "alberit", of which this is the shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And so, indeed, we perceive the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep into it, but make the cut very superficial; then put in the almagda as we have said; and when the work is complete, prepare for the patient an appropriate dark room to sleep in on his back in a dark place; and he must be abstemious of all movement, and take light food, and not move his head nor to right nor to left, but be bound according to his condition until the third day; then unbind him in that same dark room, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then put on the bandage again until the seventh day; and you must not do this during the hour of cure or after the incision just now, but you must open it so that the water rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	if such an abscess comes, that you loose the eye before the seventh day, and receive from him who soothes an abscess; and when it is quieted, then loosen the sight and put on his face the gold rim to cover any eye, and be in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then go out of the house a little at a time, and return to your bed; and know that no disciple should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from Yrach, who told us that in his country they pierce with alum, for which they suck out the water, but I have never seen anyone doing this in our land, nor have I read about it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of alchemy, so that those who do not know them can see them; and they should be of bronze properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let the heads be of the same subtle material, and the rear ones in three angles sharp.
de la char sor le neis	of the heart above the chest
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes, various discoloured warts appear, some of which look like scorpions with many feet; and there are others where the wart is hollow in colour, and others a good colour.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In the case of these warts which are hollow and not discoloured, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; open his nostrils, and squeeze out the pus at the warts, and pull them out; then touch it with the thinnest stilet you can hold, as long as you know that the wart is entirely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if any part remains that cannot be covered, open it with a subtle, light instrument, so that nothing remains; and if without swelling, or abscesses form, then cut it as it should be; and if they are malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize them until the pus is dried out and all the rotten flesh is removed, then apply ice or cold water and wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If it works and moisture reaches the palate, know that it is healthy; and if moisture does not pass through as it should, know that there is necrotic flesh in the bone above, which the instruments cannot cut through: therefore, you must tie a rather thick linen thread around the finger, and it should be tied with a knot between each finger, either a tight or loose knot; then put the patient's finger, holding the thread, into their nose as far as they can bear it, and pull the thread towards the mouth until it comes out through the nose inside the mouth; children often do this in school, and it is an easy matter for anyone who wants to do it; then hold one end of the thread, which comes out through the nose, in one hand, and the other end, which comes out through the mouth, in the other hand, and gently pull the two ends towards each other while holding the finger steady.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do what you know that the teeth have corrupted that flesh, then draw out the thread, wipe off the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nostril as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode all that is remaining of the flesh; and then put into the nostril a plug of cotton for a few days until it heals, and if there is need of dry medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, through which one distills oils and medicines into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be made of silver or bronze, shaped like an open lamp, similar to a candle, and with a handle; and if you want, make a closed vessel, and fill the instrument to cleanse the head; and have a handle on the head to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the heart above the chest
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called «telul» arises at the top of the head; it grows and becomes large, so that it is visible to the eye. Therefore, you should treat it at the beginning, and remove all the pus; then place the cautery or burning medicine on it. If one delays covering it until it has become large, then take care whether it is hard, a bad color, or insensible: do not touch it with iron, for it is an abscess, and when one opens it, great harm comes to the patient. But if the abscess is from a superficial touch, and not from a deep color, and you see that one can cover it all, then open the patient and treat the area of dry and constricting things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the head is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when the solution of continuation comes into one of these cartilage channels, it benefits little, except in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, when this happens to someone, one must examine whether the wound is fresh with all its blood; then stitch together the two lips and treat it until it heals; and if the lips are torn on both sides, one must scrape all the parts of their skin until they heal, then stitch together the two lips, and tie them tightly, and powder over powdered dragon's blood, and burned incense; and put on top of the powders a piece of strong plaster or other binding plaster, and leave it to heal by itself, then treat it with ointment.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of sewing is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the sewing of the belly; or with thread, as I have made you aware.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At home on the lips there are hard abscesses, similar to grains of wheat, both smaller and larger; therefore you should twist the lips, and cut them with a knife on each nodule, and then take them with tweezers and scrape the area after making an incision with ground vitriol, until the blood is stopped; then use vinegar water, and treat the area with dry substances until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of gum swelling
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times a growth appears on the gums, which the ancients call 'albus'. You should hold it with tweezers, cut it at its root, and let the blood or pus flow; then place powdered vitriol, or other restraining and drying powders, on the spot. If the growth returns after the incision, and this often happens, cut it again and cauterize it; if it does not return after cauterization, that is the way to treat it.
des sordens	of the ears, nose, and throat
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	sometimes they are attached to the roots of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, and there are ugly and rough growths; and sometimes the teeth are black, yellow, or green, because corruption has reached the gum, and the teeth smell bad; so you should make the patient hold his head in his hands, and press his lips against your finger, and then pull out the teeth or the growths, as far as they will go; and in this way, you should also deal with blackness, yellowness, greenness, and other discoloration, until they are cleaned; and if what is pulled out at first comes back, do it again the next day and the third day, until everything is removed; and know that teeth require various forms of instruments to pull them out, according to what the work shows you, so that the forceps used to extract teeth have different forms from those used between the teeth; and these forms, together with others, should be prepared for you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you are curing a toothache, it is necessary to wait as long as possible before pulling the tooth, because there is no need to hurry. It is a very delicate matter, and one must not be in a hurry to pull it out.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then, when the patient is compelled to pull, you must be certain of the tooth socket.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain deceives the patient and he thinks it is in the good tooth, and so he pulls out the healthy tooth; and even then the pain does not go away because the bad tooth remains, as we have already experienced with these patients. And when you are certain of the tooth socket, you must scrape around the tooth all the way to the gum on all sides; then move it with your fingers or with fine tweezers little by little until it is well loosened, and then grip it tightly with the tweezers; and let the patient's jaw be between your knees, and hold it firmly so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	Afterwards, pull out the tooth carefully without breaking it, and if it does not come out, take one of these instruments and insert it into each side gently, and move it as you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and eaten away, one should fill the hole with cloth, and then gently hold it with pliers so that it does not break while being held; and one must carefully work around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be careful that you do not break it and leave a part of it behind, causing even greater pain for the patient due to the root's wickedness.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And beware of doing as ignorant surgeons do, who in their haste and arrogance sometimes break a tooth, not heeding what we have told you; they often bring about great sickness due to the roots that remain, or by breaking the tooth, as we have often seen. And when the tooth is drawn, wash the socket with wine or garlic and salt; and if there is bleeding, which often happens, apply powdered vitriol to the site; and if this does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of instruments, by which the teeth are pulled out first, should have long points and thick handles so that they do not break when you pull the tooth; and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be made of thick material so that they do not bend when pulling, and they should be well-made iron, and they should be toothed to hold the gums.
de la racine des dens	from the root of teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains in its place, you must apply wet cotton with lard for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	while the area is softened, you should then insert the tweezers called "algefri", which make the shoulder look like a sore; and they should be made as sharp as a file, and that is their shape.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tweezers, then you must uncover the skin all around the root and insert the instrument called "althali", which is a spatula, of which this is the shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root pops out with this, that is good; if not, then use all of the instruments, whose shapes come next:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And one uses this instrument which has .ij. tongs, of which this is the shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are in the reason of teeth, and of this instrument which looks like large tweezers, whose shape is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this instrument be sturdy enough that it does not break, and know that many dental instruments exist; and also other instruments which are not counted; and the wise master subtlety finds his own instrument according to what his works and the disease show him, for there are many diseases for which the ancients did not teach any instrument because of their diversity. And if it does not break in the bone or in other bones, but protrudes, then he seeks the instruments that he needs, that I have told you, and helps with gestures; here is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and strong enough to hold the bone so that it does not slip, but can be held and removed; and then restore the place with appropriate medicines, and if there is a protrusion in the bone, and it is small, then treat it with this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural order of the body, and its shape is unattractive, especially in virginal women, then you should know whether the tooth is new after the tooth, and is not in the right place, and cannot be filed or ground down; then pull it out; and if it is airy with the tooth, then take this instrument, of which here is the form, and is similar to a small beak, and let it be made of iron sharpened at the end:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the gum recedes a little every day because of the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that one can be filed, then file it with a file like this is the shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and is also like the file that needles are made with; and file the tooth a little every day slightly, so that it does not move until it fits; then smooth it at the end with any rasor, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, then file the roughness so that it is even and does not cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth is loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth is loose from either decay or injury, and the patient cannot chew without pain, and you have tried binding medicines which did not work, then it should be restrained with a gold wire, because silver wires turn green and rust, but gold never does; and the wire should be neither too thin nor too thick, depending on the space between the teeth. If you want to extract the tooth, take the wire and wrap it around the two healthy teeth, then push the shoulder between the loose teeth until you reach the decayed tooth on the other side. Then begin covering again where you started, straining your hand gently and firmly until it is not moving; and the ligature should be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then grip the head of the tooth with tweezers and bring it together, and tie it between the healthy teeth so that it does not cut the tongue; then leave it as tightly as possible for as long as it can stay in place, and if it comes undone or the thread breaks, then tie it with another thread; it should remain in place and serve its purpose for as long as needed, and this is the shape of the teeth and the arrangement of both the healthy and the rotten ones, as you can see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when a tooth falls out, it is placed back in its place, little by little, as we have said; and no one who is not wise and experienced should meddle with this, and sometimes the shape of a tooth from a cow's bone is made, and it is put in the place where there is a defect, and it is held fast as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover the line of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Sometimes the tongue is tied underneath, either by nature as we are born, or through an accident of a wound; and the treatment is to open the mouth of the patient, and hold their head in your healthy mouth, and lift their tongue; then grip the large nerve tie with tweezers so that the tongue is loosened from its housing, and if there is swelling or a nodule due to a wound, and it has pierced the nail, then grip the nail with the tweezers and loosen the tie; and be careful not to cut too deeply into the artery underneath; once you are finished, raise the area with rosewater and garlic, or cold water, then place a tent of linen underneath the tongue; and paint the wound every night so that the edges do not fuse together.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if there is bleeding, then place vitriol on the site; and if the blood flows, then cauterize it with a lentigo cautery, which is good for this. Then treat it further until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it is black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, then do not touch it, for it is a chancre. And if it is inclining towards blenorrhea, and there is moisture, insert the nail, and open it with a subtle spatumile, and release it from one side and the other; and if the bleeding occurs while you are doing this, apply crushed vitriol until it stops, then return to your treatment until you draw out everything. Then wet the area with rose water and celery water, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	of abscesses in the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes there are growths in the throat called "godath", and they are properly called "almonds". When you treat them as we have described in the division, and they do not heal, be careful: if they are hard abscesses of a small size and a pale color, then do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron for fear of bleeding; but let it be until it bursts, or it will burst on its own; and if it is white and the root is thin, have a blade ready to cut it, but first examine whether the abscess is calm and soothed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Therefore make the patient sit facing the sun, and his head be in your lap, and open his mouth and the sergeant holds his jaw between their hands, and press the tongue down to all the instrument, from which there is the shape; and it should be of silver or thin brass as well as a knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Having pressed the tongue down with this instrument, you will see the tonsil. Take a pair of forceps and grab the abscess, then pull it out from the tonsil, drawing any threads of membrane along with it. Then cover the instrument again to maintain its shape, for it is designed like a hook; the tip curves upward and the ends curve downward, and they are very sharp. It is made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument available, you can use a pair of tweezers that are shaped like it.
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And it is sharp on one side and blunt on the other; and when you have cut one of the tonsils, then cut the other in the same way, and after the incision gargle the patient with warm water, and water and garlic, and if there is bleeding, then gargle the patient with water, or scoops of pomegranates that have been cooked, or bay leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then cure it until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses besides the two tonsils arise in the throat, so cut them then as you did the two tonsils.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, that is to say, the abscess was very small; and she had a swollen throat almost closed, so that the woman could not breathe through the airway, which was blocked, nor eat nor drink, and would have died if she stayed like that for another day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess had become so swollen that it had pushed up two bumps from the back of her throat.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I hastened then, and pushed into one of the openings, then drew out a large piece of pus; then I cut into the other opening in her throat, and opened her mouth and pressed on her tongue; afterwards I pushed the probe into the abscess, and scooped out a portion of it, and only a little blood came out; and thus the airway of the woman's throat was cleared, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I continued to cut into this abscess for a long time; and it would shrink then refilled the space that I had emptied, until it became very large; afterwards, I packed it and cauterized it within her throat: thus it remained without growing; and I left these parts, and she was in God's hands after me.
de l’uve	of the liver
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the eye descends to the socket and is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; if it is large and round beneath, then it is called an "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the abscess beneath is pacified, and it is subtle; and it is rounded together and not long; and it is blood-red or a fuschia color or black, then you should avoid cutting into it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it according to the manner that I have said, from its white and length, you should cause the patient to sit facing the sun, and press his tongue against the instrument of which we spoke earlier; then pierce the eye with the needle, and draw it underneath, and scrape at it with one of the two instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the two almonds.Et s’il aduient que li cure ne profite mie, et les pustules ne se rompent mie, et la pusse n’est pas extraite, si covient que tu retires loz estrumens, et retires la pusse avec le crotin, et apaise li malaide selonc la maniere que j’ai dit ci devant.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you must not cover anything more than the excess that is beyond the natural term; for if you cover more, it is harmful to the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said about the incision of the two testicles, and cure it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of covering, then you should use the cautery for the sense of fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the method of the cautery is for acute ague.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the method is that the patient puts his head on your lap, and then presses his tongue against the instrument we described in the chapter on cautery, and breathes with hot air, not too thick or thin; and use the implement we described, which is shaped like this:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it has a handle at the top where the medicine is placed, like the handle of a spoon; and you place the instrument with all the medicine on the eye, and the patient lies on his side so that the saliva and mucus from the medicine do not run down into the throat and lungs; then hold your hand over the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour, until you see it harden and the burning sensation of the medicine subside. Then take some cotton, wrap it around an instrument, moisten the cotton with the medicine, and insert the instrument wrapped in cotton into the canal above, so that the cotton rests on the eye; do this frequently until the cautery is complete, then let it dry for four or five days. If you need to apply the cautery again, do so, then wash the area around the medicine with cool water, and treat the wound with gargarisms until it heals.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is safer than incision or cautery. If it is cured by fumigation according to this method, take calamus, hyssop, marjoram, rue, chamomile, wormwood, and similar herbs, and mix some of them in a pot with honey, and boil it; the pot should be well-glazed with strong clay, and inside the pot there is an instrument shaped like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be made of silver or bronze, and one end is inserted into the mouth of the patient so that the vapour rises to the eye through the canal, until the eye is mortified; then he should do this often, until the eye dries up; and take care not to do this at the beginning of a hot abscess, because many things can happen; nor should this be done beyond the decline of a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put an egg-shell inside the end, so that the mouth of the patient is not too hot; for the egg-shell does not let the vapor burden the mouth, and it is a good treatment together with salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times a fish bone or spine, or some other thing, gets stuck in the throat; so you must draw out what you can see and press the tongue against the sun with all your strength, so that you can move the object; and if it does not become apparent to you and remains stuck in the throat, you should make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps the object will come out through vomiting. Or the patient may swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread; and tie a thread to the sponge and then swallow it; and when it reaches its place, it will catch on, and then you can pull it out; and if it does not come out in the way we have said, take an instrument of lead according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And the instrument should be bent at the tip so that it can more easily enter the throat, and its tip should be lifted up; and take care not to touch the epiglottis, or it will fold over, nor push the os inside; and move it around so that the patient swallows the instrument, in order that it can dislodge the object; then he swallows it down, or you pull it out with the instrument equally, until it is out.
de la sansue de la gorge	from the mucus of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Sometimes the treatment is bleeding, as I said in the division, through the use of medicine; and when this does not help, then look at the throat of the patient towards the sun, and then press his tongue with the instrument that I told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the vein, draw it out with a small hook, or with тонны thin forceps that are suitable for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, take a heated iron wrapped in a cloth, and hold it in the patient's throat; then hold the heated end of the iron to the affected area, and do this frequently.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient has a fever all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	And take a full glass of cold water and open your mouth and pour it in without swallowing and move it around with his hand often. And as soon as the patient feels the water, he should spit it out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it doesn't work as we have said, then smoke the patient with assafetida, using the instrument I described for smoking out the eye; do this several times, because it will work without bleeding.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the way to do the smoking is to take a pot with burning charcoal in it and cover it with a perforated lid, and put the instrument's head into the hole in the middle of the lid; then blow your smoke into the instrument, and the patient should put their mouth over the end of the instrument, close their mouth so that the smoke doesn't escape but goes straight to the blood; the blood will come out now, and if it doesn't, repeat the smoking many times. The patient must endure thirst and eat salty things, but not drink any water. Then it will be necessary for him to go to the toilet because of this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument used to pull out the mucus is, when you can see it, like curved tweezers that can enter the throat; and it has the shape of a bird's beak, and is coated with limestone, so that what it grabs cannot escape; and here is its shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many kinds of abscess appear, according to what the memories that come later in this book indicate, and they differ in penetration and size; and there are two ways in which they occur, one being in their very appearance, and in what they retain moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is due to the places where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of fleshy places are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if there are abscesses that one must not pierce until the bowels are dead according to their fulfillment; and there are some that one must pierce when they are cruelly, and do not die according to their fulfillment, like abscesses that are near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses occur near joints and are left until they become pus-filled around the edges, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint may be corrupted, causing contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Or the abscess is near the principal member, and if you delay piercing it until it becomes pus-filled, it will harm the principal member; or if it is by the fundament, one should pierce it so that it may drain and not fester within, becoming elongated, and a fistula forming; nor can it heal in a short time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And one must know the time for lancing an abscess which is mature according to its nature, and that is when the pain has subsided, and there is a reduction in fever, and lessening of pain and redness, and relaxation and softening of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and one should lance it where it is most dependant, and where there is an opening for pus to escape; and the lancing should be done from the long side of the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints affecting nerves and arteries, and in all places where there is no fold.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those who bend, according to which member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to let the piercing be until it becomes confirmed in completed digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	Because if you pierce it in front of that, then the bowels are opened and the body is filled with filth, and perhaps the lips and the depths of him harden.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if any abscess that is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you must treat small abscesses with small openings; and large abscesses with large openings and many slits according to the appearance of their size; and in some abscesses where it is necessary to pierce the skin, and cover; when they have become like cloth, and are deadened, then one should do as one does with blisters: and there are some that are split into three angles; and some from which one covers as a myrtle leaf, like abscesses in the bones; and some where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar covers.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who have no head, such as a superficial boil, you must pierce it plainly; and when the boil is large and has drawn a great bowstring, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the bowstring in that hour, but draw out a part of it; then stop the boil until the next day, then draw out something again from it; do this several times from great to small, until the bowstring is released entirely; likewise if the patient has little strength, or is a woman carrying child, or a small child, or an elderly decrepit man.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the pus sometimes leaps out with the release of the bowstring, which might kill the patient, and you would not realize it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, approach this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced the boil, wash the wound, and examine whether the wound of the boil is small; and if it is a plain cut, apply tenters made of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large boil with many openings, you should insert a tent in each opening so that they touch one another; and if you have cut into the boil in a circular manner, and washed it around, then you must fill it with old cotton or razor shavings from unbleached linen without moisture, and leave it for three days; then remove it and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs in your work, bring cold water and ease, and wet the cloth, and place it over the bleeding area many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding persists, administer treatment and care, and use the powders I have described earlier in this book; and if it is winter, and the area is very nervous, then you should apply wet tents and cloths soaked in warm wine and oil; but if it is summer, and the area is fleshy, then you should apply wet cloths soaked in water and oil, or in cool wine and oil, for three days, as we have said; then loosen the abscess, wipe and treat it, as appropriate, until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And now we must discuss generally about treating abscesses: I have already told you how to proceed before treating abscesses, and now see the chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	From the head come small abscesses, and they are caused by us through our clothes, just as the scabs of a chicken are, and there are many variations of them.Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some with fat and such where there is moisture as well as pus; and there are others that are hard and stony in texture, and there is no doubt if the artery does not do the opposite.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the waist is that you should test all instruments called "entromissoire", from which forms come later, depending on what they contain.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, then they will release it from above.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is evacuated, then it scrapes without leaving anything behind from the skin that contains the moisture, for it returns again if you leave nothing behind; then plunge cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and those who stay up all night will cure.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then restart the cotton, as before, on the second and third day, until you are sure it no longer hurts at night; then dress the wound with an ointment suitable for healing, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess contains pus and fat, cut it according to this form, from top to bottom; and gouge out your fingers, and scrape off all of it, and put all your treatment in drawing it out through the cotton where he lies; and if the artery does not respond well, do what I have already told you.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also treat an abscess if it is a stone, and cut and dress it as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the incision on the abscess of a stone and moisture, is lighter because they are filled with less blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And some of these abscesses in the head where there is no moisture, and this was the case with an abscess I lanced on a very old woman; and I found the abscess like a hard, rough, white stone, which could not be broken; and if anyone had cut into it, it would have made them a wound as easily as a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming from the head, whether those that come to the heads of children or the roots of the ears, the opening should be made as low as possible in the most dependent part, so that the pus can issue; and they should be treated as appropriate.
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times abscesses occur in the neck and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes elsewhere in the body, and they are large and interconnected.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly within its own part, like the ulcer and abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many similar scrofulae.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and others that are stubborn and refuse to heal.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In those where you see a healthy appearance in the touch, and it resembles the color of the rest of the body, and is not swollen on one side only, nor affecting the nerves of the neck or artery or channel, and is not deep; then you should cover it from above, and scrape away at each part, and let the two lips of the wound be at an angle, as needed, as we have said for abscesses of the head; and treat it little by little, and be careful not to cover any nerve or vein, and do not use a scalpel or knife too aggressively, so that the hand does not slip, and do not go too deep, only as much as you need.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, then put crushed vitriol or some powders that stop bleeding into the wound, and bind the wound; and leave it until the abscess is quieted, and the wound is softened, and begins to fester.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the bleeding is stopped, return to your work, until you finish it; then seek with your finger if any small scrofula remains, and cut them out and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, you must not cut that scrofula in its root, but ligature it with a strong double thread, and let it drop without harm; then treat the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then heal it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut around the entire ulcer, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them up now, so that there is no superfluity remaining due to the size of the ulcer.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	you should proceed to cut off its root and pull it out, then sew it up as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those ulcers that hold superfluity, pierce where it appears to be dying; and pierce it thus as the one before was described, depending on it, then apply bandages with ointment and similar things so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is clean, then cure it with ointment smeared on a cloth until it is healed.
de squinance	of squint.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients wrote and spoke of throat-slitting; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the script of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those with squint, it is necessary that the flap of the throat, which is called the "epiglottis", be cut; and one should not make an incision through this, because all the veins and the lung of the patient are in those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both armpits.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the lung, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent loss of life due to strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we wish to split the epiglottis, we should split it below three circles or four, a small split across, between the two circles or according to the amount of the split in the soft palate; and those parts which are subject to the splitting of the epiglottis so that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long from it.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, he should stretch the skin of the throat all the way to the Adam's apple, then split the larynx until it reaches the voice box; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then close the wound, as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the artery of the voice box which leaps out through the broken place, and by the lack of voice; and leave the wound open a little.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed in which one fears strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound in the neck, and stitch it up all the way to the cartilage without leaving a gap; then administer remedies that promote healing until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says that one should not do this until the throat is completely swollen and the patient is judged to be at death's door and the shortage of breath.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then close the epiglottis so that the patient cannot choke, and he will breathe through the wound, and thus is kept from dying; and because of this, the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the mischief of the disease had passed, and it passes in 3 or 4 days. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and cure it, once it was healed; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw a young girl take a knife and stick it in her throat, and cut part of the windpipe; I was called to heal her, and found her as good as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound and found that the blood which had issued from it had not flowed out any further than the throat, and the blood vessels were intact.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried and sewed up the wound, and healed her until she was cured; and the young girl had only hoarseness afterwards, and returned to her natural state; therefore I say that one should not be afraid to cut into the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called a "throat hernia", and it is a large abscess the color of a plum, and it occurs often in women; and there are two kinds: natural and accidental; a natural one has no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental kind is in two ways: one is like a cyst, and the other way is like an abscess that comes from an artery; there is doubt about it, and one should not use strong remedies except on one that is small, and test and examine throughout the whole entrance: if you find it just like a cyst, and it cannot go anywhere, cut it open as one cuts a cyst, and treat it all over its surface, if there is nothing inside; then examine carefully and heal it as it should be.
des nous	from us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways of doing this, all of which I will describe; but now I must explain the difference between a cut and an incision.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that a discharge is a persistent fever and heat until the boil has burst and completed its course; then the fever and heat will cease.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With a cut there is no heat or fever or pain; it contains pus, which is its own sac and follows the color of the body; it begins like a pustule and becomes large; there are two appearances, either dry or moist, and in terms of color they are as I have described in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to the treatment of a boil, you must first test and examine it with an instrument called a "probes", according to what its shape indicates in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the way to inquire into abscesses is to squeeze the most moist part that you find in the abscess, and keep squeezing gently until you feel that the pus has broken through the skin, then it should be according to the size of the abscess; then extract the instrument, and take care not to squeeze anything out.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the pus is flowing freely, whatever color it has, treat it as I have described for other abscesses; and if after squeezing with the instrument no pus comes out, know that it is solid, so do this in a cross shape, and take hold of it with tweezers, and gently scrape off the skin on each side and guard the wound so that you draw it out cleanly with the cut; and if you cannot draw it out cleanly, then draw it out in pieces so that nothing remains.Et se li moistor ne veult pas correre de la croiz, si le fent en rond et non pas en croiz, car il n’est selonc la croiz que li moistors veulten corer; et si aprés ce que tu as tiriet la cotte, s’il demoure encores quelque chose dedenz l’aposteme, si le traies a la fine par pieces tant qu’il soit tout traiez.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	Because if it is not removed, then the nail will return many times; and if a little of it remains and does not hurt you, then employ some corrosive powder on the wound, and constrict the wound, and put warm poultices on it, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed; and if the nail is large, then cut its two lips, and treat it with that which softens meat.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein is pulsating, or any other vein that you are hastening, use vitriol and leave it for 2 or 3 days until the wound suppurates and the bleeding stops; then return to the cupping as before.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of the trocar, which come in three varieties: large, medium, and small; and there are three types of these, called 'albaret', and one called 'breb'; and they also come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the aperture of the fistula; and they are similar to the needles used to pierce sorcerers' marks, and are made of brass, iron, or silver, but the yellow ones are best, and have been proven with black pitch to pierce fistulas; and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the aperture.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of warts are very diverse, as you can see: large, medium, and small; and there are warts that have two curves in three ways as well; and there are warts that have three curves and are also in three ways; and there are warts that have two curves and only one curve, and they are in three ways; and all of these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The heads of these instruments are sharp, and some only cut from one side, so that they do not cut the vein or nerve; and there are small tools that are used in wounds, so that the patient does not suffer when opening abscesses; and they are of three types: large, small, and medium, as you can see; and they are only used on fleshy parts, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar areas; and sometimes another small instrument is made, resembling a slice of a finger, according to this shape, with which blood is stopped.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is sometimes put in the place that heals by copious bleeding of the veins and arteries, and sometimes they are made according to this large form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	At times, the breasts of some men become swollen when they are infected, and they look like women's breasts; they remain disfigured and swollen. If one wants to cure them, he should follow this recipe from line b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Scrape off the fat, and treat the wound with ointment containing cauterizing ingredients, then stitch together the two lips of the wound, and heal it until it is clean; and if the breast hangs down, and has become soft because of its size as it does in women, then make two incisions on top, at each side, so that one cut holds the other at their ends, with the longest cut containing the shortest according to this illustration, from line b. to g.; then scrape off the skin between the two lips, remove the fat, and apply what we have described regarding stitching and powders, and anything else necessary for healing, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to bleeding, then you should fill the wound with wet cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it dissolves the remaining fat and the skin, then heal it until it is clean.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the armpit
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from under the armpit are like hard scrofula nodules, some of which contain pus and moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus that is in the abscess has been discharged, then fill the wound with clean cotton, and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton and treat it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are similar to scrofula, they should be treated as we have said for fissures of scrofula, and if the wound is deep, then apply cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of bleeding from an artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is swollen and the skin above it, then abscesses often form, and also swelling of the vein; and so one knows that it is caused by the artery when the abscesses are long and deep; and when you touch them with your fingers, you feel a pulling; and when it is caused by the vein, there is a deflating pus coming out; and it is foolish to cover this abscess, especially when it is below the armpit or under the jaw and neck or in many other places, and it is large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore one must avoid using an iron cautery, and if there is one on the head, then that one also; and when there is swelling from an artery above the skin, make a cut along the length of the artery from line .b. to line .g.; then open the skin at the edges, and carefully separate the artery from the flesh, so that it is exposed; then insert a needle underneath the artery, and pierce it through to the other side, and constrict the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I taught you in the extraction of the two temporal arteries; then pierce the area between the two threads with an introducer, so that the blood inside flows out, and so release the abscess; then administer the cure by squeezing bowels, until the ligature slips off; then treat it with the appropriate ointment, until it is healed; and if the abscess is caused by the vein, then one must dye their hand with the pus from the abscess to the skin, then insert a needle underneath the area where they are holding the hand, and pierce it, and insert a double thread, so that you draw it through to the other side; then tie off the abscess, as I told you, at the ligature in either one of the two places; and if you doubt that the threads will slip out, then insert another needle underneath the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and pierce through, and constrict the threads in four places; then cover the abscess so that the superfluity flows out, then cover the superfluity with a moistened cloth in wine and oil, then administer treatments of tenting and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As well as abscesses coming in the artery and vein, they come to the nerves when they are injured, or from too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens most often in the shoulders and elbows and everywhere where there are joints, and it is a deep abscess, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in various states without pain; and when one applies pressure to it properly, the patient feels pain, and it is not throughout the body but under the heart; and it is mute from all sides, and does not go forward or backward, or down or up, and that which is in joints should not be covered by iron: otherwise there will be contraction; and that which is on the head or forehead, treat with a poultice.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and pull out the root; if it is large, cut into it with a knife, and scrape away the flesh, then cut out the bone and sew up the wound, and heal it until it is cured.
des grosses boces pendans	large boils hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	At times it happens in the belly and nowhere else; it is a disease called "mushroom" due to its resemblance to mushrooms, with thin roots and thick stems. There are small ones and very large ones. I once saw a man who had two in his belly that looked more like mushrooms than anything else, with no difference between them, white in color, with fine roots, and split open, from which moisture would flow.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I cut them open and found one weighing 18 ounces and the other 6 ounces, and their appearance in the incision is such that you should check if the disease is moist, and the color of the joint is white and moist with thin roots; then cut it with a spatulum, and have the fire cautery ready in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Because excessive bleeding often occurs when cutting, and if the blood flows, then hasten to cauterize it; and if you see the disease is frightened and fearful of the iron incision, take a well-prepared thread and tie the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days; then constrict it, and do not stop squeezing the thread until he cuts the joint, and it comes out without any effort; and if the roots are thick, then cut with fear for the belly, but you can certainly cut half of it, then cauterize it so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and be careful not to cut the belly which is of a purplish color and of poor sense and milky appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of cancer later.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil pops
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the boil comes from cauterization of a wound or from a fissure in a syphilitic sore, and it is on the abdomen and some of the bowels, as happens with other ulcers, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is in front, or from wind; and if it is through the ulceration of the syphilitic sore and through the outlet of the bowel, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and there are various outlets.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is from the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it with their fingers, it rises, and then returns, and sometimes it is serous, and increases a lot at the entrance of the bath and with great effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and it opens up well when you press it with your hand, and it does not constrict; and if it is due to blood, then the abscesses are large and hard, and they are fixed according to a quantity; and if it is due to wind, then it is soft on touch, and the work is that you look to see if the appearance is due to blood from an artery or vein, or wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you need to let the wound heal.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, about the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is in the intestine or bladder, then you should command the patient to tighten his belt and be stretched out straight, then sign all around the stomach; then command him to lie still between your hands, then go around the place that you have marked on the whole spasm, then extend half of the abscess above the great fingernail; then tie it tightly all around with a strong thread or strong silk cord, and let the patient's nose be free from the rope; then work half of the abscess extended over the rope, and put in your finger, and seek the intestine; if you find it caught by the rope, release it and pull out the intestine from the abdomen; and if you find the bladder, grab it at the nail and cut off the excess; and if the artery or vein makes a noise, go around smoothly, then return to your work and take two needles, and thread them with two strong threads, and pass the needles through what you made in a cross so that you make a piercing; then draw out the abscess in four places on the needles, and when you see it, remove the needles and let the place heal as it can, and cut away the dead flesh by itself; or scrape it when it becomes thin and healable, then cure the wound as needed, and close the wound.
dou chancre	from a ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have discussed the types of ulcers and how to treat them with medicine, as well as the importance of cauterization with iron. Now, let us speak of the ulceration that occurs in the mouth, and the great caution that must be taken in its treatment. The ancients said that when an ulcer is in a place where it can be reached, such as in the breast or armpit, and in similar places, it should all be removed when it is in its early stages. However, once it becomes large and old, one must not touch it, for I have never seen anyone heal from this.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the work, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you sometimes purge the patient of black bile; then let him bleed if he has manifest fullness, then open the disease in a suitable place to perform the operation; then cut your fingernails or calluses, and the skin all over, and the bone all over without leaving anything; and let the blood flow out completely, and squeeze the site well with your hand or something, and if the bleeding from the incision of the artery or vein makes you feel faint, cauterize it until the bleeding stops; then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already discussed in the division the appearances of dropsy and how the accumulation of fluid occurs, along with the signs of each appearance, the treatment through medication, and that which is cured by iron. Only this much; one should not use iron for these two types of dropsy: tympanites and yposarche, as they are fatal conditions. Therefore, when treating this type of dropsy called "eclites" with medications and the cure does not help, consider if the patient is weak or has other illnesses besides dropsy, such as stomach issues and similar conditions; then one should not use iron, as there is a risk involved. But if you see that the patient is strong and has only dropsy, and is neither too young nor too old, then you should proceed as follows: lift the patient straight up, and have an assistant press on the abdomen to push the fluid towards the lowest part of the feet. Then, take the spatha (a type of knife) with a serrated edge and proceed in this manner:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let there be two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And let there be two parts. a point, and yet not so sharp that it can pierce the intestines when you insert it, nor bleed; then look to see if the dropsy is in the intestines: then you should split under the armpit on the right side; and if the disease is the liver, then the split should be on the left side of the armpit; and it is not good for the patient to lie on the split so that the superfluities do not flow into that weak place; then pierce all the way through the skin with the instrument, and plug it up, and leave your hand at the whole spatumile between the skin and the syringe as you would when skinning, to the amount of a fingernail or more; then pierce the syringe so that the spatumile comes out at the desired place, and this is where the water will come out; then pull it out, and plug up this instrument with what it is made of:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	It resembles a silver-colored wire, made of thin bronze or light iron, with a small hole in the lower part. On one side there are three holes, on another two, and on another one, and the head is shaped like a feather, cut in the form of an incision that scribes use to shape feathers:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	above the tip is the funnel, so that when the instrument comes to a boil, it is drawn up immediately into the instrument; therefore empty half or a third of it, for if you empty more than is appropriate in that hour, by chance the patient may die from the shock to his spirit due to the instrument, or he may faint, or he may approach death; but empty according to the quantity of his strength, and according to what the dispositions of his strength indicate, and his pulses; then withdraw the instrument and hold the vessel steady, and now it is retained by the membrane which blocks the hole above the syphiac, about which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then reintroduce the instrument the next day if you see the patient bearing it, and draw a small quantity of water; do this each day, and beware of overdoing it until there is only a little water left.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	If you doubt the illness and leave it a lot of water, then cure with hot sand or ash, and with much sweating or bathing in the sun; and if it is dyed by drinking, cure with medicines that dry up until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after the extraction of water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born without a foreskin, or with a small one, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If necessary, he should pierce the foreskin with a very thin needle according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then put a thin piece of lead in the foreskin and ligature it, and hold it thus for three or four days, and when he wants to urinate, remove the ligature, and urinate, and then put it back; and perhaps this is not necessary at all, because the urine that comes out does not allow the foreskin to close.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those whose foreskin is tight, if it is treated with the cautery of lead, as we have said, will loosen.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the foreskin in its place are blighted, for some are born with the foreskin at the tip of the penis, which prevents them from urinating until they lift their penis upward; and they cannot ejaculate because the material cannot reach the glans, and this is a serious ailment.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method of treatment is that the patient lies on his back, then the tip and glans of the penis are cut to the size of a feather, so that the foreskin splits in the middle, as it should be; and beware of bleeding which often occurs, and if it does, stop the blood flow with something that stops blood flow, and treat the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	of pustules on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times, there are boils on the penis, and it is an ugly skin appearance; and there are both benign and malignant ones; so you must cut them to a depth of one-eighth inch, then scrape and clean all of them, then put cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment over them; then cure with thin ointment until it heals.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the foreskin is malignant, discolored and putrid, then you must apply the cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cut it, and if the foreskin is inside the penis, and part of it is within the skin and part outside, then you must first remove the foreskin that is inside; and when it is healed, then cure the part that is outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you heal it together, if the foreskin is not secure and piercing occurs, then blackness and corruption arise in his penis and scrotum; so you must cut off all that is black and corrupted, then apply the ointment of honey and flour made from pomegranate rinds and walnuts, then heal it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if there is bleeding, administer the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauteries are of two types: for bleeding and for corruption; and if the foreskin is swollen and drawn back, you must boil the end of the penis with lead in water, and the patient must urinate through it; and if there is pain at the tip of the penis due to a wound or an abscess, then you must cut it with an instrument, so that the skin splits, and the foreskin is freed from all around, and the head of the penis is delivered from all parts; and if it is difficult to speak of this, then you must cut it with a spatulum at some spot on the tip of the penis and the glans; then gently pull them apart and place a thin damp linen cloth between them that has been dipped in cold water so that it does not become erect again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not dislocation of continuity like other wounds; nevertheless when we perform this act of our own will, and properly on children, it is necessary that we make the best and lightest wound for their safety.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not circumcise their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experimentation.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the greatest part of masters and surgeons who circumcised around the glans, and with force, and all over the foreskin; so the head would go out because there are two membranes, and by chance one is above and the other below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Then they bandage it, and the pain is doubled, and in the purification which is done from below, the joint of the member is not set right; and in the purification of the nail, perhaps the iron escapes, and they ruin the work, and many times they grow thus so that they do not need purification and I want it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the purification which is done with force throughout all the thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut justly as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because when you press your hand, you cut evenly into it all around; but the thread should be well tied around the skin; and the manner of the first work is such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only tying the thread around the rod, and then you make him move in every way you can; then you make him stand between your hands straight up, and keep the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, or any of the instruments; then you put your hand on the rod and breathe or kiss it, and pull it up until the head of the rod is in; then cleanse it well of the filth that has accumulated there, then tie the place marked with a double thread, then tie it under I to the other string; and hold it by the second string with your thumb and index finger, and press between the two strings, then lift the skin gently and pull the head of the rod; then let the blood flow little by little, for that is the disease; and put powder on top of the powder, a cloth glued with an egg cooked in rosewater, infused with good fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, and heal it with another healing until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the force for purification is as follows: the two cheeks should be thin and sharp, and the ears as big as the hands, equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	the error of purification is when the wound within bleeds; therefore, you must stretch it with your fingernail, so that the pus makes an abscess; and the scabs likewise, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then hold it with tweezers, and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it persists for 3 days, and what is under the foreskin is swollen, then let it be until the abscesses are soothed and the scabs lightly peeled; then cut it as much as you can, and be careful of the part of the foreskin, it will not harm him in any way.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore treat the site of sudden injuries with a poultice, as we have said in the treatise on poultices, and if it oozes pus excessively, do not wipe it away, but let it flow; then treat it as we have said until it heals.
dou retenement de l’urine	from retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to a stone, or congealed blood, or an obstruction, or a growth, or similar causes that we have mentioned in the previous section. If the urine is not released and you see the obstruction caused by the stone lodged in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent over at the waist with his feet on his back, stretching his abdomen from above the back, and straining as hard as he can; this will force the neck of the bladder upwards to expel the stone, thus releasing the urine. If this does not work as described, and the patient experiences great pain, then you must use a tool called a "syringe", made as follows: it should be crafted from thin silver, like the feather of a bird; the tube should be about a palm and a half in length, with a slender end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the way to pass urine is that you take a double thread and tie it to the end of some wool or cotton, and put the end of the thread into the syringe; and compress the excess wool and put it up to the end of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or lard and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a chair, and raise his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water; then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then tie the penis above towards the scrotum; then fill the syringe up to the bladder, and feel the patient's bladder being emptied, and if this is not done according to this order, then the person guiding where it goes is wrong; then pull out the thread all the way through the wool, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out, and let the urine flow; and repeat the syringe until the bladder is empty and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	of bladder diseases
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When burns or bleeding occurs in the bladder, or when pus gathers there, and you see water and medicine dripping out, then do this to all of the instrument which is called 'clepsydra', and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and has three openings: two on one side, and one on the other, as you can see; and the hair-like channels through which the medicine flows should be such that it blocks the penis without addition, so that one can withdraw moisture, and push when necessary; and when you see your medicines moving in the bladder, place the tip of the syringe in the moisture, and draw while pulling the plunger out; thus you will draw moisture into the syringe, and then push the plunger in strongly; the moisture will enter the syringe, and come to the bladder at once, so that the patient feels it; and this is the form of the subtle enema with which one enemas the bladder: thus it is:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is made of silver or brass, and the head is higher; and under it has a testicle or both testicles hanging; then take a bladder of mutton and put the moisture in which you wish to enema the bladder, then tie it between the two testicles formed of a good double thread, and heat this moisture over the fire; then push the tip of the enema into the penis, then squeeze your hand over the bladder gently, until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder; and if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make it into a circle, and pierce it all around; then tie the thread tightly in these openings, then assemble the circle as one assembles a lid, and put inside what you wish of oil and moisture and water, and attach it to the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, by squeezing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of stones
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already discussed in the division the methods of stone extraction along with medications; and I have described the difference between a stone lodged in the ureter, and all the signs, and on which type of stone one should operate; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder occurs more often in children, and it is a sign that the water flows from the bladder similar to water in its subtlety; and it appears as a vein, and the patient feels pain in his penis, and he can urinate many times, and then it swells; and many of these stones have hard cores; and the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is fitting first to cleanse the patient with an enema to draw out all the feces that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it sometimes blocks the search for the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet and tilt him upside down so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it comes out from the upper region; then have him sit between your hands, which are equipped with an appliance, and his hands beneath his thighs so that the bladder is fully tilted downward; then feel around inside; if you sense the stone in the passage, then hurry now to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not come out with the touch, then moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is fat, or your middle finger if the patient is young and slim; then insert it into his anus, and feel around for the stone, and when you sense it at your finger, draw it toward the neck of the bladder; then press on with your finger, and guide the stone to where you want to cut.Et le piege a tu qu’il ne se mueve pas tant que li piere ne soit taillie.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the assistant to press on the bladder with his hand, and for the patient to extend their testicles upwards with their right hand, and with their left hand pull back the skin underneath the testicles in the area where the incision is made; then insert the spatulum tightly, following its natural shape.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And they make an incision between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the navel; and it should be straight above the stone, and both fingers should be at the anus, and the incision should be diagonal so that it is wide at the top and narrow at the bottom, according to the size of the stone, not too large; perhaps the pressure of the finger at the anus will cause it to come out without effort; and know that there is a kind of stone that has angles and edges: it is difficult to extract; and there is another kind that is round like a grape, and its extraction is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And for the one with angles and edges, make the incision larger; and if it does not come out, then you must use forceps at the top like a file to extract the stone so that it does not slip away; or you insert a thin instrument under it at the head; and if you cannot capture it thus, then widen the opening and apply vitriolic ointment, and if there is more than one stone, then insert the largest into the neck of the bladder first, then push it out, then the others afterward if there are several.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then it must be sutured, and a larger wound made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For there are two things that can happen to the patient: either they die or the urine comes out where the urethra cannot heal; but nevertheless, you must continue to draw it out with tweezers, until you have removed it in pieces; and when you have finished your work, apply incense, aloe, and dragon's blood to the wound, and constrict it, and place a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, on top to soothe the hot abscess; then re-bind the wound on the neck, and do not loosen the ligature until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, wash the area well with oil and water, then treat the wound with thin ointment and thick ointment, until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if hot abscesses and corrosions come into the wound, and blood congestion in the bladder, and there is retention of urine due to this, which is known in such a way that it comes out with the urine: therefore, insert your finger into the wound and draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and cause it to protrude; then wash the wound with water and garlic and salt, and help him in every way you know how until he is healed; and it is necessary that every hour that you treat him, you bind his two thighs together, and assemble the remedies on the site.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small and lodged in the urethra, piercing it and preventing urine from flowing; then the treatment I have described, which you should cut into many times, is sufficient for this condition.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have tried this successfully.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	And the treatment which is more beneficial to health, then one must cut it as soon as possible, for it cannot stay, and the urine cannot pass; and while it is being cut, he feels great pain, but after it is cut, he feels relief.Take a 1-inch iron rod according to this shape with 3 angles fixed in a tongs:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot move back into the bladder; then insert the drill into the penis gently, until it reaches the stone; and turn the drill in your hand inside the stone, little by little, until you pierce the stone from another side; then urine will flow immediately, press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is broken at once and comes out with the urine, the patient is cured; if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents them, tie a thread under the stone and another above, then push the penis against the stone between the two threads, extract it, untie the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood in the wound; treat until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of stones in women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It sometimes happens that a stone becomes lodged in women, and if it does, the cure is difficult, and is prohibited by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-informed woman who reveals herself to midwives, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that, by chance, one cannot find a woman well-skilled in this art of medicine; and the fourth way is that the stone in a woman is deeper than in a man, so it needs to be cut more deeply, and there is greater fear involved. And if necessity arises, one should press a needle into it, and if one cannot extract it with the needle, then one must use a very fine castor oil; and present to her a wise midwife experienced in the affairs of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command regarding the inquiry of the stone; and be very careful that the woman is a virgin. Then she should press her finger into the urethra and seek out the stone; and if she finds it, she should hold it firmly beneath her finger, and command her to press her left hand hard upon the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If you find it, then you must move it from the entrance of the bladder all the way down to the root of the thigh; then press on the stone in the root of the thigh towards the middle of the groin, where the testicles are located and feel the stone in that area; do not move your hand above or below the stone, and let the incision be small at first. Then pour water into the incision if you feel the stone has been cut so that it can come out; know that there are many types of stones: small ones, large ones, rough ones, smooth ones, long ones, and round ones, and some have hairs on them.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	You must know their appearances in order to understand the cure.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood comes out, then apply ground vitriol and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your work so that the stone can come out, and have ready the instruments I told you about in extracting stones from men to aid you in your task; and if the blood comes out and it is from the artery that has been cut, then apply the powder to the site and constrict it with bandages and tourniquets, and do not touch that wound again, and leave the stone and do not try to remove it, for the patient might die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the swelling has gone down, return to your task and have the stone extracted.
de hernie carnouse	of fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	A watery hernia is nothing other than an accumulation of moisture or white pus, which is located below the membrane of the testicles that contains the egg; and it is called 'pus', and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one believes it to be another egg; and this occurs between the white pus that we mentioned earlier.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the cause of this hernia is due to weakness that affects the testicles, causing this material to accumulate and spread.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testes, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a yellow shade, or it is red-less, or black, or watery white, and that happens more; and these are the signs of recognizing this assembly, for if it is in the white syphilis that we have said, then the abscesses are re-emerged, a little long as the shape of an egg, and does not appear to the testes, because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the testicle itself, then the abscesses are re-emerged with part of an egg, and because of this one thinks it's another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the testes and the white syphilis, it feels good; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, test the entire scrotum, from which the shape is described above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this then, what comes after the scrotum, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with fire, the patient should be bled according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then he should lie on his back on something slightly raised, and have a lot of blankets under him; then he should sit on his left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs next to the heart; then take the spatulum, and cut into the skin between the ribs up to the breastbone, and make the incision straight while cutting into the skin of the ribs all the way to the white skin, and scrape gently according to his strength; then pierce the skin fully with water through a large hole, and draw out all the water, and then apply your fingers, and let the skin heal; and do not touch the heart, but only the skin; cut all around it carefully, or the water will return if you do not cut well; and if the egg jumps during your work, put it back in its place when you have finished the work on the skin; then sew together the two lips of the skin of the ribs with one stitch, then heal it like other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the wound corrupted by another disease, then you must tie off the vessels that are suspended, fearing the flow of blood; then cut into the vein at the suspension, and extract the wound, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the water is collected in two parts together, you know that they are two blisters; then cover the other part as you did the first equally, then wash the blood, and put on the wound soft lamb's wool moistened with rose oil; and put another piece of lamb's wool moistened with wine and oil over it, and place a cloth over the two blisters, and place doubled linen over that, and bind it around all the length which is according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two pieces of cloth and stuff them with lamb's wool according to this appearance, and have them sewn together at the crotch of the breeches, and one of the shoulders press upon the bottom up to the back, and the other on the part of the hip; and the other two ends above the two angles, and have all the binding gathered in the buckle of the breeches; and sometimes this blister is treated with cautery in place of an iron incision, and it is that you press the thin chisel-like cautery upon the skin of the blisters, and it is heated as we have said so that the white pus containing the water is exposed; then take the cautery according to this form and pierce that pus at the joints, and scorch it with this thin hot cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And cut in all the ways you can, as long as you stretch everything out; and be careful that the fire doesn't touch the egg; and know that this work is safer; and move carefully to prevent blood loss, and avoid wounds from cutting; and if anything opposes you, whether an abscess, or bleeding, or something else, then cure what opposes you, according to what was said earlier.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this treatment due to its horribleness, then bring about a perforation as I told you, and when you are sure that the fluid has been drained from the egg, have the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the lower part to the full width of the spathomile, and insert the perforation deeply into the body; make the holes wide so that all the fluid can flow out; then put cotton over the wound, and bandage it, and leave it for the rest of the fluid to drain, and then cure the wound until it is healed; and if the white membrane does not allow the fluid to exit through the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a feather or the instrument used to treat hydrocephalus patients, of which the shape has been described earlier; widen the wound, and know that the fluid will return and will be discharged six months later or about that time, and when it is discharged as before, and thus the patient will pass their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the testicle abscess
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the dissection of this armpit there are many dispositions of fear, because of which it seems better to leave it as it is. And I will tell you about its work and the similarities of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I therefore say that many abscesses come from the body, and especially in the groin; and this is through a great variety of cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is known as an excess of bitterness and ague, which is spread in the joints, or from a blow; and the color of the abscess follows the color of the body; and it does not hurt, and it is a serious abscess; and sometimes there are grey, fearful, and piercing abscesses with flowing color, and sometimes it comes from the vein, or inflammation of the vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from the vein, it is known by the hot disposition of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and you should not touch it.Si li apostemes s’asseient sur les gues, si est de nout d’artere et est grive maladi.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Those who are affected by swelling of the vein are known by their appearance and the feeling of the fingers, and anyone can well judge the nature of this condition and similar ones; you should press on the heart of the testicles, then the egg is pushed up, and the white sac is drawn out from under the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg has become soft with these new characters, then you should therefore draw out the egg and squeeze it; and if there is air in the sac, or anything in the vessels inside, you should release all that tissue and squeeze it firmly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the origin of the yolk is at the back, then you must cut it completely and extract the yolk, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is done, employ the wound with moist wool in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the testicle abscess
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is a kind of abscess wrapped in a wrapper similar to an onion, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient suffers greatly when it moves; and the cure for this disease is just as fearsome as the one before, and yet we will tell you about its treatment according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary for you to make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then bind the suspensory of the testicles with a towel, and all the vessels that are close to the penis, and tie them tightly; then cut through the spatumile in a broad, straight line across the vessels, so that they are exposed, and then cut from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries in the temples; then insert a needle with a double thread where the vein has appeared, and tie it to the first place where the vein came out, and then tie it directly to the other end; then draw them gently according to the length of the body, along with the corrupted moisture; then treat the wound as we have said for the others, or insert a bow so that some vessels may be cut that nourish one of the testicles; for there is no harm in this, and if the vein appears in all the vessels, it is necessary to draw the testicles to all the vessels, so that the ureter does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and dry out and can no longer help.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rot of the scrotum
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The causes of this hernia are either by the incision that comes from the scrotum, or the extension above the abdomen in the region of the groin, causing the intestines to descend through this opening to one of the testicles; and this opening is either in the scrotum, or from the extension of it, and these two types of hernia come about for many reasons: from a blow, or a jump, or a strain, or the lifting of a heavy load, and similar things; and the sign that it is an extension from the scrotum is that it happens gradually over a long time, and does not occur suddenly; and the abscesses are even all the way to the bottom, because the scrotum presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are that it is of the section of the syphilis, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear various, under the skin close by, and it is due to the exit of the intestine and the body from the syphilis.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the stones descend with the intestine, and are retained inside, and cause great pain for the patient, especially when they are pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments of iron, there is fear, because of which one should abstain from it.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the way to treat it is to instruct the patient to pull the intestine back into the wound with his hand if he can; then hold the scrotum between your hands and lift the testes; then press the abdomen above, and grasp all the skin of the testicles from their long end; then insert a pair of forceps into the opening of the scrotum according to what you need in order to open the wound, so that the bile can come out; then cut away the scrotum under the skin of the testicles, until all the hard white scrotum is exposed on all sides; then put your index finger into that which follows the testicle, in that which is between the white scrotum that is under the skin of the egg, and between the second scrotum, and away from that which is behind the egg, and between the second scrotum; then move your right hand inside the scrotum, and hold the white scrotum up in your left hand, and lift the egg up with all the scrotum towards the abdomen; and instruct the assistant to extend the egg upward, and untie that which is behind the bandage; and feel with your fingers if there is any intestine wrapped around the hard white scrotum, and if you find anything, pull it back into the abdomen; then take a needle through which there is a thick thread made from ten fibers, and insert it through the back part of the scrotum, which is after the skin of the testicles; then grab the ends of the threads with your fingers, so that there are four threads; then tie them together in a cross shape, and bind the scrotum, of which we have spoken that is under the skin of the testicles, with a strong ligature in two places; then wrap around the threads and tie them tightly in two places, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter and cause an abscess to form; then put the ligature according to the first long ligature, two fingers from it; and after these two ligatures leave the scrotum that is under the skin of the testicles with the greater part of a finger; and after all this, grab in the part that is under the skin of the testicles, as far as the blood vessels and the skin, as we have said before; then apply soft wool soaked in oil to the wounds, and apply the ligature that we have described.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white syphilis that we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision, due to fear of blood flow.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens many times, and leave the bandage on until it bites through; and if it is slow to fall off, then soak it in hot water, and apply what we have said again, until it falls off; then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients say that it is made like the ram's horn which is together with the vein, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after the incision above slightly under; then press on it gently, and treat the abscess with what we have said, until the vessels fall away; then cure it as we have said, until it is perfectly healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes a fistula occurs in the veins, as we have said, and it opens up; and no intestines come out into the anus, and if they do, it is very little, and you must mend them every hour; and even if it remains too long in this state, then the wound becomes putrid, so that the intestines come out; and this happens by the extension of the pus into the veins, as we have said, for it is extended, then made soft and swollen, and opens up; and its cure is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is cured by iron in this way: and you must let the patient lie on his back between your hands, then press on the swollen area of the fistula with a large amount of salt according to the size of an egg; then draw out the pus which is under the skin that surrounds the anus, then take a needle and place it over the visible part of the fistula; then press it firmly into the depth of the abdomen, then cut the two visible parts of the fistula on the needle, and cut one and the other; then draw out the head of the needle, and do not cover or extend the wound in any way, as I have made you aware in the cure for a fistula of the intestines; then cure it with the cure for wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the thread, clean and treat the wound until it heals.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	Syrup is constricting and has no appearance in bleeding, and cautery is more beneficial and closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the scrotum becomes soft in some men because the testicles inside are softened, and it appears milky white; and when one wishes to treat it, they must make the patient lie on his back, and cut the softened skin on top of the natural skin; then sew the two lips together with a single stitch, and if you see, close the superfluity of the softened skin with three or four stitches firmly; then cut between the stitches, and treat it as other wounds until it heals, and cut the thread.
dou chastrement	of chastisement
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	You should know that castration is prohibited in our law, and for this reason I would prefer not to discuss it in this book. It is only necessary for two reasons: the first is so that the doctors can answer questions and know how to treat the condition; the second is because we often need to castrate certain animals to help us, such as bulls, rams, horses, and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that castration is done in two ways: by menarik, or by cutting.Si il est fait par atraction, il faille prendre et li testicules et li cordons et les attraire vers le bas tant qu’il soient deffaitz; et s’il ne peut ataindre a li testicules, qu’il tire li cordons tant qu’il soit adessis, et qu’il ne se muevent plus; car il ne faut que l’atraction soit faicte selonc la nature des cordons.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In that which we do by attraction, we make the beast sit in warm water until its joints are softened and relaxed; then you grip it with your hand, until it is healed and you no longer feel anything.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	On castration: you must dye the beast and press its testicles in your left hand, then tie the scrotum, and beat each testicle one by one when you have well-scratched them; and leave some pus of the syphilitic medicine and the subtle syphilitic medicine which is on the vessels; and this type of castration is better than that done by attraction, because with attraction something may remain in the testicles, causing the beast to desire lust; then cure the wound until it heals.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one is that between the two testicles appears as the form of nature of a woman, and it has hair, and sometimes urinate from it.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way is in women, and it has above the wrist as well as a wand and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment of men and women is that you bandage all the joints tightly, and treat them like other wounds; in the second method, for men whose urine leaks through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the tetter
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	A tent is a swollen joint on the natural part, so that it is too ugly to look at; and some women have them as large as a hand, and that is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	You should dye the excess of the tent with your hand or a cloth, and bind it gently; and do not go too deep, lest bleeding comes from it, then cure another cure until it is healed; and to another wound that occurs at the mouth of the navel, use cow's dung, and perhaps it will work, and it is like the appearance of a cow, and because of this they called it the "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you must cut it, as we have said above, treat and cure it until it heals.
de erratique	of erratics
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	It is errant when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the passage is small; and it is natural at birth, or accidental due to illness that comes to her; or it is due to a foreign object, or a thin or thick cyst, and it is formed deep in the pelvis, or on the sides, or below, or wherever; and they should understand conception and childbirth, and possibly flowers to have; and the knowledge of these things is through observing the dance.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the tumors are nearby and apparent, then use your fingers or a stick.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is from a thin cyst and it is nearby the lips, then do this: place your two index fingers together, and let the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then form the lips so that the thin cyst is pierced and cover the tumor; then take wool, moisten it in oil, and place it over the area, and let the woman rest at home every day so that it does not close up.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the ulcer is hard and dense, then you must cup it with spatule resembling a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the swelling is from fresh flesh, soak it with vinegar and cup it; and have medicines to stop bleeding, such as ake, dragon's blood, incense, and yolk of egg; then apply a broad piece of wool so that the wound does not close; and thus for a long time, and apply a tent of dry linen; then treat with other treatments until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the wound there is fresh flesh, it must be cupped in this way, unless it is an abscess.Et s’il y a en l’un d’eiles ou d’autes membres de l’artere, si que li sang soit distenduz, si covient qu’on le tienne ben estainchiez et la coute a la raie; et s’il y a aposteme enchancre, si covient qu’il le fasse inciser sus la veine.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an abscess in the head, one must not touch it with fire.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are opened veins from which blood flows, and when hemorrhoids are old, they become الثؤلول; and we have already discussed their appearances and signs in the previous division, and I will now describe those that are curable.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and الثؤلول, when they are emp- by fire in the head, and do not appear to be felt, are not cured by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the mouth of the head, one can feel, are those that can be cured.Si li emorroide est en la marris et n’est mie emp-, si covient le fer curer.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is necessary, then, to place the woman in a cool house, and then heat the bed with tongs, and the comforter at its roots, and then powder over blood-restraining medicines, such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then, bind her feet to the wall for an hour, then place her in cold water; and if there is bleeding, have her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel and gallnuts and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and garlic, and make a plaster with it on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, have her breathe in steam from the back and breasts without burning; then take wool, and soak it in plantain juice or in dogwood juice mixed with old wine, and apply it to the area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has settled, then treat the area with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red and resembles coarse wool, so it should be covered as I said before; and then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	Here is the translation of the provided text:
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	There are many types of abscess that come about in the body, such as cancers and piercings, and herpes, and boils, and wounds, and hemorrhoids, and hot abscesses, and various other ailments which I have discussed in the classification.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore, I will discuss in this treatise the hot abscess that occurs in the body, which is not among those that discharge pus; and if you want to know about iron treatment, then observe whether the abscess is painful at the onset of its appearance, and filled with heat and fever, and whether it turns red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore, do not hurry to pierce it, but let the pain subside; then have the patient sit on a chair, with two small seats to lean against, and support his back, and bring his feet together to one side of his leg; let his thighs be spread apart, and place his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a bandage; then suck the wound towards the right side, and administer the instrument used to open the mouth of the wound, from which the abscess will form; you must insert the rod first to determine the depth of the wound, so that what enters the wound does not go deeper than it should, and does not hurt the patient; if the instrument is larger, cover the wound with cloth so that it does not cause discomfort; the patient should hold the spout of the instrument, and you should heat the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess is opened and they do it on the soft hand, then it should be covered with a poultice of the chief or with a spatumile. And when the bowel is evacuated, then you should put into the wound wet tents in rose oil, or in dry green oil; and put the tent outside the wound at the bottom of the injury, and put a bandage over the injury and over the clean, moist lamb's wool in water or malva leaves that have been cooked; then cure after two days of ointment, until it is healed. And sometimes raise the injury and the wound by a clyster of water and honey, and then with water or roots of iris and aristology that are cooked for a long time; then return to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is retracted into the injury, you should not cook with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	It is necessary for the midwife to know the natural form of childbirth and its signs, so that when you see a woman pushing downward and desiring to smell the air, then the child hastens to come out; thus you know that this childbirth is according to nature, and the afterbirth comes out with the child, and the mother is cleansed of her excesses by good cleansing; and this one who comes in any other way does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For sometimes it comes out feet first, or the body or shoulder, or hand, or it comes out from the abdomen or navel, and is turned upside down by chance, and in other evil forms; therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these matters, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the forms and how one must help.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the baby emerges head-first through a natural birth canal, and the mother gives birth painfully with weak contractions, then seat her on a stool or have other women support her. Boil a mixture of oil and fenugreek, and then use a small spatula (as described below) to gently apply it:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And split the amnion, and press on his fingernail until the fluids within flow out; and press on the woman's belly until the child comes down, and if it does not, then the woman must be given a clot of fenugreek with oil of sesame; then let her be pressed and sneezed with incense, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: then now deliver the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands come out, then you must push them back in gently a little bit at a time; and if they cannot go in, then put the woman on a chair, and lift her feet up; then stand the chair on the ground, and hold one hand under the woman so that she does not slip while standing; and if the hands cannot go in, and the child is dead, then grasp the hands with the knife which was mentioned earlier, and extract the child, and reset the dislocation in the same way.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the birth of a child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes out on its feet, it should be pushed upwards; then pull it slowly and gently until it is straight; then grasp the foot and extend it slowly and gently.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it leaps to the crotch, instruct it to grab there, and make it sneeze with some incense; if it leaps out, so be it, by God's will.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump out as we have said, then move it little by little, until it is in its natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it will be easy.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come out as we have described, take myrrh resin and oil of six days' standing, and gum that has been melted, and grind everything in a mortar; then apply this ointment to the woman's womb, and make her sit in warm water up to her ribs; and when she is soft underneath, put a collar of myrrh around her neck and let it rest there for an hour; then have her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and squeeze her mouth and nose gently, and press her belly lightly, for the child will come out now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the child's delivery onto his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, then the midwife places her hands on the child's back slowly; then she lies the child on its side, with its feet hanging down, and lets it lie on its side on the bed; and she bends its hands slowly, and then presses her hands on its stomach, and removes the cushions from underneath, until the child is lowered; and if the child does not cry out, then take hold of its feet and move it about, then move its stomach upwards, then put your hands in; and rock the child slowly; and instruct the woman to press down until the child emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the infant's exit, which should be about one hand wide
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I must try to bring the hand back: if it cannot be brought back, then make the woman stand up and walk around; if she cannot walk, then let her sit on the bed and raise her legs alternately; then administer the remedy that I have described; and if she does not give birth, then let her sit on a chair, and then try to bring the hand back; and rock the child according to its natural position, and make it sneeze, and instruct her to press down until the child emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the child's exit onto its neck, and have her hands spread out, and her face turned towards her mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I want the surgeon to dye his hand, then turn it slowly and gently; and when it is even, put on the nature of mustard and oil, as we have said, then tell her to move it slowly; and when you have done this, make her sit on a chair, and tell her to hold her nose; and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same way for all of the afterbirth
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes out in this way completely, then grip the placenta with your nail, until the moisture is drained; and if the child hangs over his face and neck, grab him from the throat so that he is not held back and dies; then insert the child inside, as you have placed it correctly, and tell the woman to hold her nose some times: then let go gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are often born, and sometimes triplets or quadruplets; and this is not a strange thing, but it happens seldom.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	These are strange things and do not live, if they are not tied to the umbilical cord; I know that they are multiplied, and are separated by the syphon that divides them, which is attached to the placenta; and sometimes they come out as naturally as a mouse, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they rise quickly, then the treatment as we have said, and let the dancer be subtle, and do quickly and lightly what she does; and do thus as it is worth to save.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the land 1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 or 7, or multiples up to 15, and they are all shaped like a child according to the measurement of the glorious sage, and it is necessary that the dancer knows all this, because by chance something similar might happen; so act according to what is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat a woman of a dead child or womb, as I said in the division, and there is no flow, and you are forced to work with your hands; then it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue and does not have an accident or fear of death; then it is necessary that the woman be reclined on her back, and her head inclined downward, and her legs raised; and the minister the thong in two parts, or she lies in bed so that she is not shaken by the descent of the child; then rub the mouth of the womb with moist oils infused with musk, fenugreek, and flax seed, then anoint the dancer's hands with these oils and musk; then blow into the woman gently, and insert the thong where it is appropriate for the thing to descend; and this is the shape of the thong:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	then press against the other toe, or the third if you need it, so that the extraction is even; and then they are even as they move from one side to another to exit, and the toes are bitten to hold them in place, as this is the shape:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if some remain, then anoint the nail of one of his toes with oil, and push it into that part, and pull out the other part; and if none remain, then put this toe or a higher one in place, and do this until they all come out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes out in front of the other, and he cannot bring it back due to the tightness, then you must wrap it with a cloth until it comes out; then press the fold at the joint of the wrist or the elbow, and thus you must do for the other hand and feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the child's head is big and narrow at the exit, or if it has a sharp pain in its head, then you should push the spatumile between your fingers and open the head and extract the fluid; or you can pierce it with the instrument called "almidach", from which the form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one; and likewise, do the same if the child has a large natural head; and then pull out the bones with tweezers, and if the head pops out and is forced, it should be split so that the moisture that is in the foot can come out; and if it cannot exit, then pierce it in pieces as much as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce it so that the moisture runs out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the swelling is on his feet, then the traction is light, and the direction to the mouth of the wound is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is constricted in the belly or the foot, one must draw it out over the cloth wrapped around the hand; and they cut into the belly or the foot, as far as the moisture that is there flows out; and if the other members are affected, and the excrement remains, then he blocks his hand with a sponge at the bottom of the wound, and pulls it out until it reaches the mouth of the wound; then he inserts one or two fingers, and pulls it out; and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed by a hot abscess that has formed there, one must not work on it, but one must apply moist and fatty things; and one applies plasters, and soaks in warm water that softens and moistens.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the hernia is on his side, and you can reduce it to its proper place, one must apply what we have said about the living child; and if one cannot do so, then cut it out in sections, and leave no trace of the sac.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if it is administered to patients with abscesses that occur in the sea; and if bleeding occurs, it should be immersed in restraining water, and other remedies should be administered.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman who had had a dead fetus in her womb, then another was sewn over it, and the other died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, she got an abscess in her armpit, which swelled up so much that it opened and began to discharge greatly.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the cure, and I thought long and hard, but could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong吸引 plaster, and out came a bone, and after a few days, some more.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very wonderstruck, for I see that the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that these were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I wanted to see the wound and hands of os, so that the woman was in a better place; and the woman lived a long time like this, and then became a little bow-legged; and I did not remember this chapter except that when the master finds something strange, he knows how to put it right.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the bone back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Hereafter comes the form of the press, with which one is weaned; and at .ij. turnings at .ij. heads of .ij. strings.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the horns should be more subtle than the restrictor, and they should be made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the fust should be two fingers wide, and the edges of the trees should be one palm long or a little more; and in between the two limbs there should be two adjustments of this same wood, which are firmly attached to one another, half a palm or a little more in length; and these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the sea to open when you turn the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, with its appearance more subtle and lighter, is made of ebony wood or boxwood, according to the likeness of tongs; and has at each end two adjustments, as you see, a palm-width long, and two fingers wide; and when you see to open the instrument throughout, then let the woman lie on her back, her feet dangling and her legs open, then fit together the two adjustments in the instrument, and hold the head of the instrument underneath between her thighs; then work your hand throughout the instrument, as you have done with tongs equally, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the instrument, until the midwife does what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all decorated and have many similarities; and when the surgeon prepares them, the work is faster and easier for the patient due to their design.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not be discouraged by the instrument until you have prepared it, for their necessity is inexcusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the afterbirth is retained in childbirth, then you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze with some scent, and pinch her hands to her mouth and nose; and if she passes gas through these means, all the better.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, they take a pot and make an opening in the lid, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, such as camomile, rue, anise, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in water over fire; then they put one end of the pot into the opening, and the other end into the mouth of the wound, and they apply it so that the vapors enter the wound; then they make the patient sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	Then let the secondine boil gently.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment and does not go away, instruct the midwife to moisten her left hand in oil of sesamum or in mussel-shell oil, and then put it into her natural passage, and search for the placenta; and when she has found it, she should grasp it and gently stretch it, so that the wound is not torn during extraction; but she must move it slightly to the right and left, and then pull; then it will come out.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the opening of the wound is narrow, we have discussed the treatment of sneezing and fumigation with herbs; and if it is not healed by all that we have said, then be sure not to foolishly use a cauterization; but it is fitting that what is at the mouth of the wound, you should tie it to the thigh of the woman, then cleanse it with an ointment of tetrafarmaçon; then she will pass wind and recover, and the odor will come out; but nonetheless, when she passes wind, a bad odor comes to the stomach and head, and the illness worsens.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	So, therefore, suitable fumigations are necessary: some of the ancients have tried fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one smokes out the woman in retention of flowers and secundines, if it is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	It is like glass in appearance, and its head is sharp in nature, and its shoulders are wide above the fire; and the fumigation is over charcoal, and the teign until it is wasted, and another begins anew.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have the anus pierced, but the rectum is closed with a thin membrane; therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that membrane with her finger, and not pierce it with a spitful, and keep the bandage so that it does not touch it; then put on wet linen in wine and oil, then treat with ointment until it heals.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will heal, put a wooden rod in the wound and leave it for several days, then remove it when the child wants to walk around.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this clotting comes suddenly from a wound or an abscess; then it must be covered suddenly: then it should be treated, as we have said, with a rod of pine.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the fistula in the fundament
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from under the anus are nodular and grow larger than those that come from within the anus, or in the space between the two parts, whether there is one fistula or several; and when this nodulation is old, it opens and discharges moisture, or a white or thin pus, and sometimes these fistulas are ulcerated. They are perceived by what comes out of them, either through urination or flatulence, when the patient expels gas, and sometimes they discharge pus.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And there are fistulas that pierce all the way to the bladder, and halfway down the penis; and they reach the hip joint and up to the testicles.The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And so one recognizes a fistula that is ulcerated at the anus, and not one that is not: and it is when you put your index finger into the anus, and insert a thin needle of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no bending or crook to it.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is a crook to it, one inserts a thin tent of lead or horsehair into the fistula as far as one can feel the tent or hair with their finger; and if one cannot feel it, and no pus, flatulence, or wind comes out of the fistula, as we have said, then know that it does not pierce through; so hasten to cure it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula has reached the bladder or urinary tract, and the urine leaks out, and cannot be stopped by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is perceived just to the joint of the thigh, then the vein flows just to the site; if there is no tortuosity and the pain is felt all around, then it goes right into the bowels, and neither medicine nor ointment helps; and in these persisting fistulas, there is no cure other than labor and the vanity of foolish glances that interfere.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In one that is not perspiring and is not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced; and the patient lies on his back, and lifts his legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs tilted towards his belly; then insert an iron tent, or a lead one if there is tortuosity, as far as you can tell where the vein flows.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it around the anus, then you must insert your index finger, provided that you feel that the vein has pierced through; and if it is uncovered where you feel between your finger and the flesh, then you know that it is perspiring; do not work on it any further, for one cannot heal it.Si li tenture est alons et ne torce mie, si a grant esperance de saniteit; s’il torce et est tortuosite, si n’a point de saniteit, si com j’ai esproveit.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One can indeed heal some of these, but this happens rarely; and the help that one gives is to heat the cautery sutilly according to the width of the fistula, as it is said before; and one fills it entirely hot in the fistula, until it comes out from under the anus; and one does this twice or three times, until one knows that these false flesh are burned, which look like a bird's feather; and then one cleans with moist bandages, until this flesh comes off, and then one treats with ointment, binding up and healing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus healed, that is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it cannot be healed otherwise; and if the tent enters and does not pierce to the anus which is at the fundament, and there is between your finger and the tent a thick covering of false flesh or syphilis, and you see the fistula above this covering toward the anus; then cut off the beginning of the fistula, and fill it up in front of the tent, and then cauterize after, until it reaches the tip of the tent; and the tent will be released and fall out; then clean away that false flesh which looks like a bird's feather, and nothing will remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the pus flows, and cuts between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or with medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cautery draws together two things: namely, the burning of the flesh around the wound and the stanching of blood and the drying up of moisture; then treat the tent with butter or crushed substance until the bowels gush out, and let the burnt flesh come out in the bowels; then treat the wound with soothing ointments on hard charcoal, and the medicines are dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes all the way from the fundament, and is distant from the body, put your finger in the fundament, and probe it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent and between two is the membrane or flesh, or it is about to pierce through, do not lose heart and hope by using one of three methods: either cauterize as we have said, or cut to the bottom, or if you can, insert a tent and treat as first; but do not go too deep so that you do not disturb the lining which holds the foundation, and let the evacuations occur through there willingly; then treat as we have said; perhaps it will be healed. Or remove this covering and cleanse after it has been cut away from under the foundation, either by tent or other pointed instrument; then clean the wounded flesh that is in the wound, as much as you can; then try to restore the wound and keep the fistula in the part away from the foundation: then it will be a lighter burden on the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes there are fistulas in this way: and it is when you put the tent into the fistula, and it is on the side of the foundation next to the skin above, then take a tent pierced at the top according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And he inserts a twisted thread into the tent, and inserts the tent into the fistula all the way to the tip.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is punctured at the margin of the foundation inside, then pull out the thread from that opening, so that you push your finger into the foundation; and draw the end of the thread, and bring the two heads together, and press them against each other, and leave it for one or two days; and sometimes they are constricted, as long as the threads cut through the membranes between them, and close up; then cure the wound until it is sewn and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not drain, then have it drained in every way you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not advisable to bandage it so tightly during the bleeding, and then during the treatment, as we have said, until he is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the thorny spatumile which one uses to make a fistula is very sharp on one side and smooth on the other; and on the sharp side it does not cut what it should not, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two types: they can be inside the anus, like grains of resin, with both small and large ones, and some draw blood, and there can be one or more of them, and they can be outside the anus and at the top of the anus; but those that are outside have little moisture, and yet they often draw a little yellow water or blood, and they are colored like the rest of the body. The treatment for those who have them inside is to make the patient strain while defecating so that the hemorrhoids come out, and when the veins appear, you hurry and grab them with tweezers or your fingernail, then pinch them at their roots; if the nails cannot hold them due to moisture, they are grabbed with a piece of cloth or cotton or a piece of camel's hair, then pulled out with the fingers, pinched, and powdered with some hot powder that is used for cauterization; or they can be cauterized as described in the chapter on cauterization, and then other treatments can be applied until they heal. If the anus cannot come out, then the patient should be given a strong and sharp enema to clean what is inside the anus so that it can come out clearly; when the hemorrhoids come out and the veins have left the anus, the treatment is easy; you grab them with your fingernail or tweezers, pinch them, then treat them as we have said until they heal and fear incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you wish to perform the suturing in this manner: take a twisted thread and insert it into a needle; then pull the thread through from the top, and pierce the needle from the other side; turn both ends of the thread under the needle, and leave it slack; tighten the thread firmly, then tie it off, and remove the needle; do likewise with all the others, leaving one to draw out any excess blood; next, place a damp cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate over the wound, and command the patient to rest; then let him remain until he has defecated, and once he has done so, treat the wound with ointment and other remedies until it is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	from dryness of the anus or rectum
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Drying of the bowels occurs often in the intestines, due to constipation or when the illness is old and medicine doesn't help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you wish to use a spatulum or your fingernail to scrape away the superficial scabs without allowing them to become moist; then treat the wound until it is firm and healed; if it cannot heal, then repeat the scraping more vigorously than before, until it is fully healed and scrapes away.
dou fremit	where there is trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Ant is a small creature that moves about the body, and sometimes it bites, and one feels it like a shiver, and it goes throughout the body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And its cure is to take a straw of goose feather, or a strong vulture feather, and place that straw on the shiver, until the purple circle has surrounded the shiver; then turn your hand along the entire straw, until you cup all around the shiver, and pull it deeply, and pull out the shiver by its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make this out of a feather of bronze or iron according to this shape, and let it be thin underneath and curved on top.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not pierce it, so that it can hold the vein, and squeeze it And if you see, cauterize the vein, as it is before in the chapter on cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes an enema is made of silver or brass, or of melted copper or small and large stones, depending on the person to whom they are administered.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those which are administered to children and those who are weak and in pain are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the small and large enema is above wide, or the stomach is bound according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And it has a bulge where the belly is tied, as you see, and the buttocks are pierced inside; and it has two openings on one side, and one on the other; and the belly is where one puts the medicine in a beast's bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small holes, and there is an inch of space between each hole, then tie into these holes a strong thread of twisted thread in an X or spiral around, and gather the belly as if it were a goat; and when the medicine is inside, then tie it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, and then catheterize; and this is the shape of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	Let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head with oil or egg white, or similar, then insert it gently; then the minister should squeeze it with both hands together until it is all released, then remove the enema, and let the patient lie on his side, and if the medicine wants to come out, let him hold it as long as he can; and if he sleeps for a night afterwards, it will be of greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you catheterize him for a flux of the belly, and the medicine rushes out, then he should repeat it until he is cured.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are in the anus or rectum, then let the enema be as fine as for a child; and this is how to make the fine enema that the skin is stretched:
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already discussed in the division about the treatment of wounds; now we will discuss the treatments by hand and medicine, according to the completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and according to what makes them.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are through the impact of stone, and cutting with sword and knife, or lance or club or arrow, or similar objects; or they are made according to the places in the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or head, or foot, or belly, or liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and begin with the wounds of the head which are simple, for the memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, one should take care if it is from a stone or similar object, and the skin is still broken and the wound is large, and you quickly doubt a hot abscess: then let him immediately bloodlet with the cephalic itself if there is little blood coming from the wound, and the bleeding should be in the opposite direction of the injured part; and let the patient avoid repletion of wine and rich foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to bloodlet, then let his food be diminished, and do not drink wine or eat meat; and put on the wound, if hot abscesses come out, cotton wet only in rose oil, or in astringent wine; and if there is no hot abscess, then put on the wound, if it has all its blood and is not moved by air, powder which I will describe a little later; and if it was moved by fire, then put on some ointments until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like that of a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together with stitches, then bring them together with sutures, as I will describe for abdominal wounds.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to the bone, and there is no more than a small piece of flesh holding it together, then cut it; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse meats, such as testes and cooked wheat, as well as poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find pustules on the skin, and it is not attached to the bone, then cut off the pustule, and let the pus flow out; then cure it. And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which will not stop bleeding, and medicine does not help, then tie a string around it; and if that does not work, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is easy: you must apply this powder which will heal as soon as the burn has healed.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the method of the powder is as follows: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; quicklime three parts, and powdered very finely, and apply it to the wound, and bind it tightly, so that it heals well and joins all its blood; and then bandage it well, and leave it loose if it swells; for the medicine is not removed until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one should use chalks only when one doesn't have incense or dragon's blood, but only when the wound has healed.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the burn has moved the wound, and is in the same place, do not apply any of this powder to it; but apply some soothing ointments, or a poultice made from barley flour mixed with water and honey, until it turns yellow; then cure it with other cures until it heals.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	If the fracture of the bone comes with the wound, and it is small, I will extract it with tiny pincers; and I will tell you about fractures of the head later.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound in the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck and it is single, there is no difference between it and that of the head, except that the nerves or artery of the neck may be cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is a nerve, there is nothing else to do but let the cure proceed, and not apply anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and makes them retract; and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation with the brain, which is the highest member; but use medicated wines, such as washed wine in warm water, and mixed with rose oil, and cooked wine also in warm water, and other minerals according to this method, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, cut and ligature it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and it is chapped and full of pus, then pierce it or cut lower down; and if the artery is cut and bleeding ensues, stop it, and ligature it, and cauterize if necessary; and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the carotid, and the conduit is blocked through which food passes, then cut along the keel on the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then ligature it appropriately, and leave it for several days, then clean with a poultice until it heals; and if the wound has left an impression in the bone, then drill it out; and if there are pieces of bone, then extract them all if you can, and those that you cannot reach, leave them until the wound heals, and the opening is closed and ligatured. And if the wound is fresh, then powder with the powder I have described.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have described in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a stab wound from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then examine if the wound bleeds until the patient faints: then you know that the wound is deadly; and if it is not deep, and the wound is fresh with all its blood, then do not put the powder on in the first hour, or tie it for the blood to drain out completely, and return to the heart, and kill the patient; but apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day; and if you don't have an ointment, then place old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture, and let the patient sleep on the wound for three, or four, or more days; then no spasms, nor tremors of the heart, nor strangenesses of the soul will come; and when you see good signs, then you know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat it therefore with poultices and other remedies until it heals; and if it cannot heal, and the wound remains open, then you know there is a fistula; treat it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a cut by sword or knife, and it is simple, on the chest or back, then treat it as one who is in front; if it is large, stitch it; and if it is small, apply powder to it, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has chipped pieces, then cleanse the wound, and draw out the foreign objects if they are loose; and if they are not loose, let the wound fester, so as to lessen the extraction; and for other wounds in other limbs, judge as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	from a rupture in the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	There are great, medium and small ruptures of the belly; from the large wound sometimes the intestine, or the nerve of the intestines, comes out through which there is an entrance for air; and stitching is more difficult, and sometimes the smaller wound is worse than the larger one, because one must stitch the intestines in more carefully by degrees; because the intestines swell as soon as they feel cold, so they go back in more easily, and therefore it is better to heal the smaller wound, so that one can reset the intestine to its place before the others. And know that there are four types of rupture of the belly: the two common stitches occur in the belly stitch, and the stitch of other wounds on the body; and II other own stitches are common to other wounds; and nevertheless they are more appropriate with the belly stitch, and I will say one by one and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and some part of the intestines has protruded, and the diseased part must be removed by one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in such a way: moisten a sponge or soft cloth in lukewarm water, or boil it in squinting water and cypress and spice, and rose the intestines until the swelling is removed; and sometimes this wine-based restringent is made, and it is only applied to reduce the swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling go down, wet the intestines with water or warm and mild wine, for through this the entrance is narrowed by a little; and if it cannot enter, then they make a small incision in the wound using an instrument, as one does to treat hemorrhoids; and the first remedy is better than cutting, which no one should do without great necessity; and the instrument for splitting it is: insert it into the bend and push out, and see the shape here:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines burst out, then put them back in according to their natural form in their proper place, if you have the power, because this is worth it.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And when the wound is lower in the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on his back and raise his legs above his head, and if it is higher up in the abdomen, then he should lie on his side with his head and feet higher than the lower parts, and also if the rupture is in one of the two sides, then the wounded part must be higher than the other. And thus you should arrange what I say for great and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, use what you have at hand, and then take a needle or more, according to the quantity of the wound's size, and leave a space between the head of the wound, and insert a needle where there is a good strong thread; and pierce both sides of the skin with two sides of the sinew, which is under the skin inside, so that you make it pierce from that part, and assemble the two heads of the sinew together; then tie the thread around the needle twice on each side, then assemble the two sides of the wound properly, and then leave a space, and insert another needle, then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and don't stop doing this according to how many needles you need, until the entire wound is bound; the needles should be medium-sized between thin and thick, because thin needles cut through the flesh, and the too thick ones cannot enter well: so they should be medium-sized. And do not push the needles too deep into the flesh and skin, so that they cut and open the wound before it heals; then tie the ends of the needles, so that they don't hurt the patient when he sleeps, and put tents or rags on the ends of the needles to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed. This method of sewing with needles is most suitable for small wounds, as there is enough room for one needle or two. The second type of sewing is common, and it is that you assemble the two sides of the skin and the two sides of the sinew together on a needle with a strong medium thread; and when you have pierced these four sides, bring the needle back to the part where you started, in the manner that one sews a cloth; and leave a space between each stitch the thickness of a finger's width. This sewing is suitable for a man, and I sewed a wound on a man's abdomen, which had been cut with a knife, and the wound was more than a palm wide, and the intestines were protruding more than two palms, and the wound was in the middle of the abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned to him the intestine after it had been outside for 24 hours, and the wound was sewn shut for 15 days, and I healed it, and he recovered.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And they had pronounced sentence on him that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where there was no medicine or ointments to be found; and I put clean cotton over the wound twice a day, and washed it with water and honey until he recovered.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you about two proper methods of sewing: take the needle and pierce it through the edge of the wound from the outside in until it touches the skin; then, while still piercing from the outside in, bring the needle out the other side of the wound and into the skin again; the idea behind this sewing method is to do it like a tailor sews pelts, going back and forth between the two sides of the wound until the whole seam is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of suturing, which Galen describes properly, is like that used by some who join two pieces of skin together naturally, and apply one end of the stitch to the other, in such a way: pierce an needle into the proximity of the edge, and only pierce that spot, leaving the two ends of the wound; then turn the needle and pierce from the outside inwards, all the way through to the inside, through the two ends of the wound; then pierce one and then the other from the outside inwards, through two other points on the skin near the edge on the opposite side; this is the most common and best method of suturing.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen says this, and some testify to it: one should sew the abdomen with two needles, with thread in each; and one should push one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew wounds; and know that when the stitch is on the abdomen, it is more painful than in other places on the abdomen.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgments of the wound are like the judgments of other wounds: and it is that when you find the fresh wound full of blood, as soon as the burn has moved, so that the intestine returns and the gut; then put on the powder of the charm, and if the burn has moved, put on any ointment that is present, until the wound heals; and tie the threads, and sew up the lips and the mirach; then cure the wound like the others, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicine, as soon as it begins to heal, put old cotton on it and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you do not need any other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound will cause infection in the principal members, you should moisten a light linen cloth with tempered oil, or rose oil, and put it around the angles, and under the armpits; and if there is pain or pus in the bowels, which often happens, then cleanse them with warm black wine, and especially if the pus reaches the intestine; and pierce it from within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines, which are called "young", cannot heal when they are raw, and this is due to the thinness of the veins through which they pass, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and their close connection to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the vein pops out of the wound, put it back in just like the intestines, while it is fresh; and if it is old and has become green or black, you should tie up the area that is black so that bleeding does not occur, for there are veins and arteries there; then cut away what is between the thread, and hang the two ends down from the part below the wound to facilitate extraction when the vein breaks, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	of the treatment of boils
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small, it can sometimes be restored in some people, for I saw a man who was pierced by a lance in the belly; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and from it came digestion and flatulence; I applied a poultice according to what I could, and did not cease to apply a caustic until he was healed, and the wounds closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him sewing, I doubted that the patient had a malady in his belly; and he had no evil, but remained in better condition, eating and drinking; and some experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be bound in such a way: take a thread from a ram's testicles, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the thread has opened its mouth, place it over the two lips so that it tightens its mouth upon them; and then tie off the thread, and it will hold so that it cannot come undone, and then place another thread after in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely closed; and then cut the thread.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If they pierce the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient, one can sew up the intestine with a fine thread cut from an animal's bowel, in this manner: take the tip of this intestinal thread which is well-chewed, and then tie it to a fine linen thread which is wound tightly, then thread the needle, and sew up the intestine, and tie off the thread; and this method of sewing with threads is nothing other than according to the way of hope and expectation; and if the wound is large and broad, especially when it is in one of the grails of the intestines, there is no health or cure unless one uses great subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it wakes up, is universally called a "fistula", and especially when it is swollen and becomes bow-shaped.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is according to its nature a hard and white knot, where there is no pain, and it is as swollen as the wing of a bird; sometimes it is clear and bow-shaped, sometimes thick, sometimes small, sometimes large; and I have already spoken about this in the division of wounds, that any wound which is not healed and has no pus is only due to one of nine causes: namely, because of the thinness of blood or body, or because of its wickedness, or because there is hard matter within, and on the edges, which does not allow pus to form; or there is too much swelling; or the site is weak, and the matter poor in quality; or the medicine used is ineffective; or the corruption is a type of pestilence; or due to the nature of the region, digestion and healing are delayed, and there is swelling; or there are veins or bones: and I have already described all these causes, their signs, and the medical treatments in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now I must tell you about the treatment of a fistula that is done by hand.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	You should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins and arteries, and nerves, in the syphilis, or intestine, or bladder, or any of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet, and even those that come to the principal part of a limb, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are in this way are of grief sanation, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come to where I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you see it being understood, then take an iron or copper tent, if the fistula is straight, so use it; and if the fistula is crooked, then search with a subtle thin tent of lead, for the lead bends easily around the crookedness; and if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot search it well with tents, then catheterize through one of the openings, for moisture will pass from one opening to another, and cleanse it; then press it gently to your strength, so that you know whether there is bone or nerve, and feel how deep it goes, and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you press his hand, and where he feels it; and when you truly know the location of the fistula, if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places I have told you, then treat it as I have instructed, and remove the foreign matter and corrupted flesh that are inside; then cure the wound until it is healed, and if the fistula is very deep and straight, then you should probe deeply to your ability, then moisten tents with medicinal water, and insert them into the fistula up to its head, so that the medicine corrodes the excess matter remaining at the bottom; then apply soothing ointments to heal the flesh, until it is healed, and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then probe it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If the vein or nerve does not trouble the principal members, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is decay and blackness, then treat with hot things until the decay is completely removed, then cure with healing poultices until it is healed; and if it is not healed, and returns to its previous state, know that you have not reached the bottom: then uncover and probe until you reach the bottom, and remove all the decay, then restore the place; and if it is thus healed, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the decay is too deep for you to reach; then there is no other remedy but to leave it to nature; and if there is a small corrupt bone, and you can pull it out with tweezers, then extract it with the appropriate instrument for this purpose, and if there are many bones, pull them all out, and do not leave any behind; and if moisture causes a contrary effect, and there is no error or fear, then cut and dry, and apply poultices, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then place something on the wound that encourages pus, and let it remain until the pus extends around the bone, and then the bones will come apart more easily; and if it is a large bone, such as the leg or thigh, then scrape away the rottenness only until the blackness is completely removed, and then close up the wound; and if there is a great deal of corruption, and it reaches down to the marrow of the bone, then it should be cut out and covered entirely down to the corruption, and then healed until it is closed up; and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you can take example and aid from this in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	He was a young man of about 30 years old who had pain in his leg due to an internal cause, so that the matter came out in his leg, and it became swollen with a large abscess, and there was no reason to open it; but the doctors, through their folly, worked on him until the abscess opened, and much matter came out, and then it became a fistula, and many holes opened up all over his body, emitting pus and moisture from his body; and many doctors treated him for two years, and there was no wise man in the art of medicine who knew how to heal him, so I was called in, and when I saw his leg and the medicines that they were using to treat him, and what was flowing out of the holes, it caused great harm to the body; and the skin of the young man turned red, and he had a yellow complexion.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent at one of these openings, and then explored all the openings, and found that one opened into another throughout the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	So I hurried and cut into one of the openings until I exposed a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced all the way through; I treated what appeared to be rot on the bone, and believed there was no more rot than what I removed; and then I began to heal the wound with strong remedies for a long time, but couldn't close it; so I started over, and exposed the bone as before, and found the rot continued in the bone, which I treated, and then cut out, and worked at closing the wound; but I couldn't, no matter how much I cut around the bone, and removed all its soft tissue; then I restored it with remedies, and it healed quickly, and didn't need to reopen the wound except for the weakness of the patient who couldn't bear it, and from fear of death that I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For often through the blood-letting he bled profusely, but was completely healed, and a hard lump grew in the place of the bone, and he was of good disposition and had no harm or discomfort anywhere, neither when walking nor lying down.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken anywhere in the body, one should treat it thus: take a length of linen, and hold it at the end of the exposed bone, and have someone pull it upwards; and take another piece of coarser linen than the first, and tie it over the lump that is above the bone, and hold the end, so as to draw the corrupted flesh towards the bottom, and uncover the flesh above where you see the corruption, so that the string does not cut into the flesh; and put a hot iron or a wooden paddle under the bone to cover the corrupted flesh; and one should continue to do this as often as one can see and feel the corruption, and do it again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is broken and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in part of it, then uncover the flesh all around; then put a hot iron underneath, and then pull the sore from one side to the other, and let the poultice be applied from the long end of the corruption as we have said; and if the corruption is at the joint, then cover the corrupted joint and apply the poultice to the bone on the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuance of two joints, then there is no other way to cover it; and if the corruption is in the knuckle of the hand or the foot, then this thing is very strong, but nonetheless you should inquire into that corrosion, how it appears to you; and cleanse it in every way you can, but so that the vein or nerve do not cause any harm; and know that there are many knives and instruments for covering these bones, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of them, and their thickness and thinness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness. And therefore one must prepare an instrument for each appearance of work; and know that the work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the manners of diseases; then think about the instrument which you need according to what is appropriate.
dou feu	fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The heads can suffer damage from internal causes or external ones; and when you have treated this corrosion with medicine, but it does not help, then you must cover the affected limb up to where the corrosion occurs, so that the patient escapes death by this, or by the greater evil of losing the limb; and the signs are that the limb becomes black, as if burned by fire, and after the blackness comes the corrosion, spreading from limb to limb, and throughout the body; so you must be quick to cover it, and if it is due to the sting of some venomous creature, such as a sea scorpion or snake, and similar, and the sting is on the head, then cover it, and do not give it any space to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it reaches the hand, then cover at the joint so that corrosion does not reach the arm; and if it reaches the arm, then cover at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, that is death, and there is no remedy other than the quantity of its virtue; and thus do likewise when corrosion comes to the foot: if it comes in the first joint, then cover after the other joint; and if it comes to the foot, then cover all the foot; and if it rises in the leg, then cover at the joint of the knee; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy except to cut off the limb so that the patient escapes death; and the method of covering or binding the limb is that you tie it above and below, and extend one bandage downward from one tie, and another bandage upward from the other tie, and you loosen the flesh which is between the two bandages with a wide spatula, so that the bone is exposed; then cover and bind it, and place a linen cloth on each side so that the binding does not touch the healthy area, and comes to the patient no further harm or abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if bleeding occurs when you work, cauterize the area gently, or apply some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man in his sleep: he had a darkness that looked like a burn, and this corrosion first appeared on his big toe of the foot, so that it spread all over his foot; and when the man saw the corrosion, he wrapped his foot, and was healed; and long afterwards the corrosion returned on his finger, and he came to me, and I put some reflective substances on him after purifying the body, and could not stop the corrosion; and he wanted me to cut off his hand, and I did not want to, for I had no hope of removing the matter; and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would die, for the strength of the man was weak; and he despaired completely, and returned to his homeland, and wrapped his hand, and was healed; and I have not told anyone about this except those who need it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	At times an abscess forms in a fleshy area and remains so long that it causes a large gathering of pus; then it bursts and drains, leaving the site hollow, like a vessel; and the skin above is as delicate as a thin cloth, not healing up to the bone or nerve, and such a disease is called 'sore', but not 'fistula'; but if it extends so far that it reaches the bone deeply, then it is called a 'fistula'; and the skin is such that you can cover it all around, and especially when it is delicate, like a cloth; and it does not heal over because of its corrosion.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you have confidence that the skin will heal, and the corruption is not deep, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it with a clot-forming cautery in this way: examine whether the breast is swollen and the pus within has a foul odor; then use an Egyptian medicine made thus: take asafoetida and oil and litharge, equal parts, and melt them in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey; then take some according to your need, and dilute it with water and honey, and inject it into the breast, and hold the opening closed; leave it for two hours, then remove it by squeezing; do this repeatedly until the breast is cleansed and the pus has drained; and sometimes the breast is cauterized with ash water when this medicine is not available; take vinegar ashes of vine wood, pour water over them, let stand, and use to inject; or you can cauterize with honey and wine, which makes the skin form on its own; or with other medicines and ointments, whose properties I have described in the section on ointments. And if the opening of the breast is small, and the cannula of the syringe cannot enter, then widen it slightly with a knife, and apply a tent of Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment, so that it may enter; and if the wound is too large, cut it open only enough for the syringe to enter, and if the opening that drains pus is above, cover it below where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Because when the bowel is perforated, you should not let any food enter it; and if you cannot cover the breast beneath as you wish, prepare in such a way that the bowel moves to the lowest place it can, for when the bowel is perforated, you should not let any food enter it, and if you cannot cover the breast beneath as you wish, prepare in this way: let the bowel move gently downward, and leave nothing of the bowel; and take consolative medicines to be placed over the wound, and have a linen cloth covering all the wound; then cover the opening of the breast more widely than before, then apply soothing ointment according to the size of the opening, and place it on the opening of the wound to ease the bowel, and do not remove the large cloth for several days; and often remove the one over the opening of the breast to remove the bowel, and test what comes out of the bowel, whether it is venom or pus or sufficient, or digested or undigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in this way and you see the nature that rises over the wound, then know that the breast is healing, and approach the wound; and then loosen it in the morning, or at noon, and when you loosen the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast milk flows for many days, know that the breast will not dry up.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons spread slowly over a long time, do not despair of health, for health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	Because there are people whose wounds fester for a long time due to the putrefaction of flesh in their wounds, and others who experience the opposite effect; and if milk flows from the breast slowly after many days, know that the breast is not healing; and if the breast takes a long time to heal and is distant, apply dry medicines which are moist in substance but dry in nature, such as diaφanous ointment, for it contains a large portion of vitriol, and it is the best medicine; prepare diaφanous ointment with rose oil, and rosewater equal in substance; then cook it and use it as needed; and if this ointment is not available, take myrrh, aloes, and incense, grind them into a powder and sprinkle it over the honey while it is on the fire; then glue a cloth to it and apply it to the breast, and sometimes an aristologist's long needle is used, as well as roots of celestial lilies, which are like flour and centaury; and one can use simple or composite remedies: grind them into a powder and mix with the honey as I have described, and then apply it. And if the fistula takes a long time to heal and is not cured by this treatment, know that corruption has reached the bone, causing hardening of the bones or the limbs; therefore, one should use the cure for fistulas as we have described earlier.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that arises under the nail of the finger or toe, or occasionally elsewhere; and when it becomes infected, and no attention is paid to it, then the abscess becomes pus-filled, and it runs and seeps out as far as the root of the nail, and sometimes all the way to the bone; and corrosion reaches the bone, causing a foul odor, and the affected digit swells, and its color turns yellow.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have described in the previous section, and the treatment does not help, then you should cut away all the surplus growth from under the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cautery is a great help if the bone and nail are healthy, and the nail is growing over the flesh and starting to pierce it, and there is bleeding: in this case, you should place a thread under the nail so that the flesh is drawn up, and then carefully cut away the flesh, and apply fiery and corrosive medicines to remove all of it; then treat with ointments until it heals.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it out and draw it out, because as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal; and if you see it become infected, cut it open at the nail of the little finger diagonally, and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh under the nail, because the patient would feel too much pain; and if this happens, apply something to soothe the pain.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain from the deafness of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two types of nails that grow on some people's hands by chance are all fleshy, and by chance there is bone, and sometimes there is an nail, and sometimes they grow at the base of the joint, or the growth is in one of the fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those who grow on the nail of the finger do not move, and those who grow at the joint of the finger sometimes move; the size of the one that is all fleshy is light, in such a way: cut it off at its root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure; you must keep him covered.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one who is born with an anal fissure, you should first cut the flesh around it roundly to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable thread for this, then heal it until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joints that come together come from birth, or from joining a wound, or from a burn, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Then you should cut the fissure so that the anus heals according to its natural shape; then place between two tents or pieces of wet cloth in rose oil so that it does not heal; or place between two pieces of thin lead, until the tissue is healed, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If this swelling comes to either palm with the fingers, then treat this fracture as it should be done.
des vils	of the poor
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Veins are large, enveloped vessels filled with melancholy superfluities that come in many parts of the body; and they occur more in legs of those who walk and work and carry things, than in others.Et sont causees par humours melancolieux et superfluitiez de sang qui montent en haut par les veines.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should administer an emetic to him occasionally, and then cleanse him with basil water.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment of varicose veins is according to two methods: one is that you cut them, and draw out the black blood; and the other way is that you raise the vein, and draw it all out.Et si li membres sont gonflez, ou tu leves la veine selonc la maniere sus dite et tu trais le sang noir.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The surgery is performed in this manner: first, soak the leg in very hot water until the veins are dilated, then dislocate the leg from above the thigh to the joint below the knee; next, cut the vein in one of three places, making a large incision, and then express and draw out the black blood into your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the patient can endure; then ligate it, and order them to apply a poultice of black koliny over the wound; when the wounds are healed, repeat the bleeding and poulticing, and let the patient rest.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The amputation is performed in this manner: elevate the leg if there is a lot of hair on it, then soak it in hot water until the veins dilate and the skin turns red and the veins swell; if you do not have a bath, heat it by the fire, and then cut the vein at the top near the knee, or in the part below the ankle; next, lift the skin around the wound to reveal the underlying tissue, and scrape away any dead tissue until it appears healthy and red, and when it is black and swollen under the skin it resembles a white cord; then insert a needle under the vein and draw out the blood by twisting your hand, being careful not to cut the vein, for if it cuts, you cannot draw out the blood and the patient will be harmed; once all the blood has been drawn, ligate the vein and cut it off. If you are unable to draw out the blood, insert a double needle under the vein and pull it through, twisting your hand from side to side until all the blood is out; then cover the wound with a pad of wool soaked in wine and rose oil, and change it daily until the wound is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the wound is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it crookedly, but do not cut it; and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron used to split the wound should be curved, not cutting into the vein; and it should be a large curve, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but it should be large as we have said, and its shape is thus:
de la voinne civile	of a civil vein.
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is angular in the legs, in hot places where no herbs or trees grow, and in land without moisture; and by chance it grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens from the pustules that come under the skin, as do snakes and worms, angling between skin and flesh.And if it comes from under the nails of hands or feet, it is a sign of death.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a great inflammation comes in the leg, then the location changes, and the vein begins to come out, just as the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the vein is opened, you should wrap around it a piece of linen three and a half to four inches wide, and tie it, leaving the linen hanging down the leg; every time it comes out, wrap the linen around it again and tie it; if it's too long, cut off some, and wrap only the remaining part, and do not cover its root while it is still coming out; because if you cover it, it will go back into the flesh, causing an abscess and swelling on the site, and serious illness; therefore this vein should be treated little by little until it's completely out, and nothing remains in the body; sometimes this vein can be as long as 20 to 30 inches, and once a person came to me whose vein was 30 inches long; when you cover it, plug the hole or opening, and pierce it to the bottom so that everything comes out; empty the matter inside, and administer healing medicines on the site for several days, then treat it as you would an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes this vein is open-ended, and especially when it opens in the joint of the foot, or the foot itself, and there comes a lot of pus out of it, and from which it rains; therefore, cure it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that grow between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called "cattle disease" in our land because it often affects oxen. It is caused by a small worm that grows between skin and flesh, moving throughout the body, ascending and descending, until it breaks through the skin, and sometimes it can enter the eye and destroy it. This often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being cured and milked, it cannot be helped except when it comes to the surface: therefore, you must bind the area above and below with a strong string tightly, then scrape on top of it and milk it out; and if the worm is deep in the flesh, and you cannot remove it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies. The greatest harm it does is running into the eye as already mentioned; therefore, treat the patient with cleansing remedies for the body to remove excessive humors, and avoid foods that promote putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called "vomiting" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to various members, and then moves from member to member; and I saw what I'm telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling on the vein of the arm; and soon after, I saw it rise up to the shoulder as quickly as anything, as bright as silver when it moves from one place to another; the pain left that spot and settled in the shoulder, and then a little later ran throughout the body, until it came to the other arm; then she told me that it was returning around the body, just as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was very amazed at how she moved from limb to limb like this; for I had never seen this disease progress in this manner before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Nevertheless, I have often seen people whose pain moved from one place to another, but I didn't see it in the woman; and I thought that it was because women have dry bodies, and their veins are exposed, and that this windiness is forced out in this way, and not according to this reason in those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and relaxed veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels the pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then bind above and below tightly, and then press on until that windiness constrained in the place goes out; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it yourself, then treat it with what expels windiness, such as foul pills, and serapin pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the parts of the body where they land.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The variety of them is that there are some with large points, and small, and hooked, and glued; and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those with parts; and those which break in any member break according to two manners: either in a principal member, such as brain, heart, liver, lung, spleen, intestine, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When she falls into any of these places in the body, and you see the sign of death which I will tell you about later, then you should be wary of removing this arrow, for death comes after in many dispositions; and if this bad sign is not seen, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then pull it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain is when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, and there is a rupture above the brain, and scotomia, and soda, and discoloration and swelling of the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and loss of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps there is discharge from the nose or ears; and perhaps they lose their speech and voice; and there is moisture like pus coming out of the wound, and also bruise-like blood; and if you see these signs, then stop the treatment and pull out the arrow if it is not already.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The signs of a seizure when it occurs in the heart are that it is near the left breast, and feels as though it were pierced by a hard object, not hollow; and perhaps the seizure is silent like the pulse, and there is dark blood, and coldness and cold sweat, and syncope: then know without doubt that death is imminent.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow wound that never leaves the lung is foam coming from the mouth, and the throat swollen, and the patient's color changing, and panting heavily and seeking the cool air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow pierces the covering of the foot, it is near the small bones; and it causes great pain and great swelling and panting; and all the limbs move from the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow pierces the stomach, by chance some undigested food may come out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow pierces the gut, and no feces escape through the bowels, then there is no hope of a cure, nor in extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow pierces the bladder, and urine escapes and flows out, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and elbow and spine of the back and hip and thigh and legs, and similar members, are safe according to various dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	Once there was a woman who had a seizure in her jaw, so I tested it and pulled it from under the ear fat on the other side, and she recovered without fainting.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And I treated a man with a seizure that hit him in the fat of his ear below the cartilage, and the seizure was retracted, and all I could touch was the tip towards the stem, and the seizure was as large as a Turkish bowstring, but thin at the end without ears; he recovered and no ill effects occurred.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I extracted an arrow from a Christian's throat; it was an Arabic arrow with ears. I cut the barbs and pulled gently until I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I extracted an arrow from a man's throat, which had pierced his abdomen, and I thought he would die; but after thirty days, his condition did not worsen. So I cut the arrow, and wrapped it, and pulled it out, and he had no ill effects.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a person with an arrow in their back, and the wound is sewn shut on top; and the arrow remains inside, and his natural functions are unchanged, and he experiences no discomfort in any of his natural processes:
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And I saw another man, who had an arrow in his face, and the wound was sewn shut; and he remained like that without suffering great pain; and there are many other similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And there was an arrow shot into the home of the prince the king, who had a very painful toothache, and he was a little inclined to the right side; and the arrow was all swollen I was called to the cure after it had been three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I applied a very subtle poultice to it, and did not feel anything; but he felt a piercing and pain below his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I placed an astringent and digestive poultice on the site to prevent swelling; and the tip of the arrow appeared to me.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I continued to apply the poultice for several days, and the wound healed directly, and the pain remained for a long time, as long as he felt the arrow inside his tooth; and he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied a corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it was open and I probed it and felt the head of the arrow which was lodged in the wound; then I treated the opening with the medicine until the head of the arrow appeared clearly; the wound healed well within four months, and then I lanced the wound and pulled out the arrow with tweezers, and it would not come out; so I continued to treat the wound with various instruments until one day I was able to pull it out with specially made tweezers, as described in this chapter, and I closed the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And some believe that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored; so I restored it, and the wound was closed and the patient fully healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Here I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you may apply your treatment to what I do not mention, for books cannot encompass everything; but wise masters make do with very little, and with what is present and lacking, they devise new methods and new instruments, in the descent of strange things that occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows strike the members in which they are lodged in two ways: either through the place where they entered or through another part; and those that go out through the place where they entered are arrows entering into fleshy parts, and sometimes they go out now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not go out now, then leave it as long as the flesh around it becomes putrid and the opening becomes enlarged; and if it is lodged in the bone and cannot come out, then leave it for several days, moving it every day; and then it will come out, and if it does not, then pierce through the bone all around with a very thin instrument until the opening around it becomes enlarged, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the skull, and goes just to one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the accidents which I have mentioned appear in the patient: then do not extract it, but let it be until it becomes even after a few days, for if the arrow reaches the brain, that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is lodged only in the bone and does not reach the brain, and the patient remains for a few days without any bad accident, then treat it with the instrument for extraction.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very loose and cannot come out, then administer cauteries around it as I have told you, then cleanse the area once it has healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is lodged deep in the body so that you cannot see it, then probe it throughout with a long instrument; and if you feel it, extract it with a suitable instrument; but if because of the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow there is no bone or vein or tendon, then cut it as far as the wound is large; and if there are ears on the arrow by which it holds, bend or twist them so that you can extract it; and be careful not to break the arrow as you pull it out.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot remove it in one go, then leave it until the surrounding tissue has swollen; then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the bleeding makes it contrary, then apply what we have said about the cure in its chapter; and beware of the incision of the nerve and of the vein, and put in the oil as you can move the arrow without peril, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and put the patient according to the way he was when the arrow fell into him, for that is his greatest help. And if you cannot, then put it according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Arrows that come from elsewhere, or where something has appeared from him, or the skin is swollen in such a place that one sees or feels it apparently: cut above, as far as the pincers can reach, and then pull it out; if it will not come out now, cut higher.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, then rotate your hand roundly, as far as it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it will not come out, then leave it, and try to pull it out again until it comes out; and if the arrow is in him, insert it all the way into him; and if the arrow is short, and you see that there is room for an instrument, then insert a chewed instrument so that the point of the arrow enters into the gum of the instrument; and then pull it out, and if the arrow is chewed, insert the instrument with its point entering in, to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow has touched it, you must cut all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, then treat the wound as it should be.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If the arrow pierces the foot, or leg, or stomach, or bladder, or side, and it is near the surface, and you can cut above it; and you must be careful not to cut into the vein and nerve, and then pull it out, and then stitch the wound, if necessary; and treat it until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of forceps for treating arrows is similar to an owl's beak; see the shape here:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	There are many types: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the feathered end is also like the feather of a bird, to push onto the tip of the arrow, just as it is shaped:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the form of the tongs for pulling and probing is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common body vessels
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are XXXI veins from which one can be bled, and there are XVI in the head, namely: II batants which are behind the ears, which are called the two "ear-beaks"; and the II arteries which are in the II temples, apparent; and II veins that are in the II eyelids of the II eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the II windpipes which are in the neck; and the II veins that are above the lips, at the mouth, and these are the veins called "augeherich"; and the II veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins from which we commonly bleed are five in each arm: one is the cephalic, which is on the left side of the chest, and the common people call it "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "fast", and is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and the common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side of the chest, and the common people call it "vein of the belly", and it is above the fossa, and is that from which we bleed, which opens clearly above the pubic bone.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the salvatella is the vein that is between the auricular and the ring finger, and it has two branches; and in the leg and in the foot there are three veins: one is below the curve of the pubic bone on the left side of the chest, and the second is superficial at the ankle on the right side of the chest; and the vein that is called  "nesse", which is at the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The bleeding of veins that are behind the ears is helped by old catarrhs and by bleeding; and the qualities of the bleeder, as I told you, and it is that you press the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then squeeze the patient's neck with a vise, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending on the head; then grab them with your fingers, and feel the pulse under your fingers, and sign it; then take the lance, and pierce it under the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand over the entire vein upstream, and pierce both the skin and the vein well through the two sides, and make the blood come out until you see it; then stop it and tie it, until it is healed; and I have already spoken of the incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The bleeding of the two arteries in the temples is useful for treating old-age migraines, and eye problems, and tears in the body; and the quality of the bleeding is as I have said: and it is that the patient stretches his neck so that the two veins are clearly visible; and feel the pulse under your thumb, and then sign with your finger; then lift the skin above the vein at the top of your thumb, and insert the needle underneath, and lift the vein from above, and suck out the blood according to your need; then release the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then cotton wool; and then bind it tightly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of their binding and extraction at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The bleeding of the vein on the forehead is as good as the bleeding of the cephalic in old diseases of the face, and for migraine and redness; and its quality is that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fosseur", whose shape is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point over the vein and press with your hand or something else and let the blood flow according to the amount you see; then release the neck of the patient, and tie the vein until it is healed, and sometimes the operation is done with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Nevertheless, the flax threads should not be too thin, and the wound should be stitched across, for the bone is near, and it may break the flax thread when it is fine.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The bleeding of the two veins in the two temples helps with migraines, and redness and eye pain, and diseases of the face; and the quality of their bleeding is that the patient twists his neck by means of some thread, as before; then he bleeds, and the bleeding should be through a short length of flame, a little wide, for there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, perhaps they will break; then let blood, as much as you need, and then bind it on cotton, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The vein of the nose is good for ague, and for sudden madness, and for facial illnesses, such as emigration and redness that comes to the face, and especially when it is old; and the quality of the vein is such that the patient squeezes his neck, then his nose with your left hand, and takes a long, slender flame, and inserts it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well otherwise, and the blood will begin to flow now; and do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then tie it off for one night, for it is quickly restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The vein of the two testicles helps with strangulation of the groin, and at the beginning of mastitis, and many illnesses, and impetigo, and corrosion, and herpes, and hemorrhoids; and the quality of the vein is such that the patient squeezes his neck from side to side as we have said; and let the master stand above the patient's head while he sits on a chair, then open the vein of the long one somewhat widely, then draw the blood temperately, or as much as is needed; then do the same in the other vein, then untie the ligature, and gently squeeze both veins so that the patient does not choke; and leave it until the morning so that the wound can heal.
de la sainie des leivres	of bleeding from the lips
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The bleeding of the veins in the lips helps with cold in the mouth, and corruption of gums, and splitting of lips, and toothache and earache.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of bleeding is that the patient should sit before you and press his neck as I have said; then turn the lip and look at two veins, one on each side, which can be recognized because they are black, and because there are small black veins around them: grab both of these, and if you cannot recognize them and you doubt their location, then grab the largest one in each area. Also, do the same for the two veins above and below, as it is a similar method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	And so also for bleeding under the tongue:
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The bleeding of the veins under the tongue also helps after bleeding from the head; it aids in tightness of the throat and diseases of the throat, mouth, and the tongue. The method for bleeding is that the patient opens their mouth before the sun, lifts their tongue, and you should see a black vein on each side: grab both of these, but do not go too deep, as arteries are located there as well.de la sainie des piere
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	Veins of the head from which one commonly bleeds are bled in two ways: either with a needle to all the broad vein of mirtin, or with a subtle olive-wood needle as sharp as a trenchant, and is called 'anesil'; and they are broad and subtle according to the breadth and narrowing of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the needle is very important, and it should be wide as you can see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the flat veins of the head that contain apparent thick blood and thick troubled blood; and that is the form of the olive-wood needle:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more pointed and delicate, and is for bleeding delicate veins that contain subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps diseases that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the abdomen; and the bleeder must bleed copiously, and guard against the artery that is beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it pierces the artery and bleeding occurs, then it must be staunched, as I have said; and the needle must not be piercing, but cutting like an 'anesil'.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basil does not open clearly, then you should stretch it and change to another; or you want some of it, or you heal in its place the vein in the arm: it opens clearly; and the flame copes with silence, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you want to know the place of bleeding, then you should stretch the arm so that you feel the pulse; then sign the place with ink, and then tie the arm, and copes the vein with flame silenced; and be careful not to pierce the artery when you see the place puffed up, for it is the artery: avoid it therefore.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it rising like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is the blood of the artery: hasten therefore, and put your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger if the blood stops, which often happens; tie the arm, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient; and let him be in fear, and do not move him until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	If the blood is not staunched and it escapes, and you do not have any medicine available, then press on the artery to close it, for that is where the blood comes from; and then staunch the blood.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a strip of bark from a fig tree, and split it, and take one half and bind it well until the next day; if the bleeding stops, that is good; but if not, then stop it as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding; and the stopping of the bleeding is not harmful in many conditions because of the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The bleeding from the vein in the middle helps it to draw blood from the head above and the body below, because it is made of basil and cedar, as we have said; and the surgeon must be careful not to cut too deeply, and he should find the nerve underneath, and if he cuts it too much, the wound will inflame and the nerve may be damaged, and perhaps cannot heal; and this nerve often opens up, and if it does not open in some men because of its subtlety, then you must stop the bleeding with a cautery before you touch the nerve; and guard the nerve as best you can.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, they will cut it longways.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The vein of the head if it aids, draws blood from the head and aids the eyes; and one should open it with a flame of olive oil or a flame of myrtle, for it is the safest of all veins, for there are no nerves or arteries underneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Nevertheless, one should seek the lightest vein, and not worry if one misses the first time, and try again; and by chance, the places may swell in some men when they miss the first time, but it does no harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the bleeding depends on your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you should know about bleeding is that it is done only to maintain health and prevent illnesses; and bleeding should be done in one of the three veins: the cephalic, the fast, and the basilic; and one should bleed at the beginning of Lent, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of repletion are apparent; and one should bleed on the first day or the third, after two or three hours of the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The bleeding that is administered for illnesses has no set time, but when the need arises during the day or night, at all times and throughout the year; and one should not bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor women who are pregnant beyond the fourth month until the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should those over 60 years old be bled.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when one wishes to bleed, in whatever manner, one should first loosen the intestines with a gentle enema if they are constipated and retaining much feces, so that the veins do not draw harmful excess fluids from the intestines to the principal limbs; nor should one bleed those who are very bloated from food, or intoxicated, until they have digested their food, nor those who are suffering from diarrhea, vomiting, abdominal discharge, excessive sexual intercourse, or exertion from work, watching, fasting, and anything else that weakens the body, either through the use of weapons or by illness; then gently purifies the humors with food, drink, and medicine if you have the ability; then enter a bath if nothing else can be done to purify the blood, and bleed from the vein at the base of the penis around the third hour, as we have said; and abstain from exertion that day, as well as from pain, lust, and similar activities; and let the bleeder be higher than the one being bled, and rub the arm two or three times, then tighten the ligature above the vein gently, for if it is too loose or too tight, it will not affect the blood; then rub the site with the hand until the veins swell and can be felt; then moisten the blade of the lancet with a little old oil, then place his thumb from his left hand over the vein below the site where he wishes to bleed, so that the vein does not slip or slip under the blade.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flow like cords to the wound, and some that are full of wind, so that when one puts a flame to them, they withdraw from the flame and cannot open the vein, and thus one is made of these; and if the wound is opened, the wound is too narrow, so the surgeons must be careful in such cases.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens the first time, that is good; if not, then try again a little lower on the leg or arm, if the limb is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the vein is swollen and the patient is afraid, leave it for a day or two without binding the arm: perhaps there will be an abscess; nor enter the bath, then resume the phlebotomy if she pleases; and if the orifice is small, cut through the skin very gently and you doubt that it does not flow so much blood as you wish, then apply the flame directly to that orifice itself; and work gently, thus the vein will be swollen; for this happens many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the area swollen, do not re-bandage the wound, and instead apply a little liniment of oil, for it lightens the body of blood, and in this place the oil is changed into liniment; and thus administer the liniment of oil in every bandage that you bandage veins, to stop the flow of blood; and it also makes triaicled bowels when applied to the area; and subtly the blood disperses when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if a large abscess comes, which often happens, especially when the opening of the vein is small, and the blood issue is slight, then be quick, and apply to the area a sponge dampened in warm water and salt, and compress it for an hour; and you must do this after the flow of blood from the vein, and if it remains on the spot for several days, a blackness or green color appears, it does him no harm; and if you see any swelling, apply something of aloe or myrrh made into a poultice, ointment, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there is an abscess and a appearance of swelling at the site of the basilic vein; therefore, put your hand on it, and if you feel the area soft to the touch when compressing with your hand, then that swelling is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore be sure not to place anything on the sky that we have said, because it can go without from the artery; but make a dry plaster to harden the area, then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each bleeding according to its quantity and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	Because if the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for one who is full and swollen, and needs bloodletting, that one makes them a larger wound, and the flames should be wide; and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and they must be bled little and often, and one should bleed them by cutting across, not puncturing; and this method of bleeding is safe from blood loss and nerve damage, and is better than bleeding from a long or large wound.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for one whose body needs bleeding, one should give them moist bread in pomegranate juice; if they are hot, then draw out blood three or four times. And if they are of a cold complexion, then eat before the bleeding moist bread in mulled syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints after the loss of a lot of blood, then he should drink some warm broth and sweet-smelling syrup, and use other things that we have mentioned in the chapter on fainting, for the opening of a vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to open his arm and bleed again, then when he is weakened by significant bleeding, he should bleed a little at a time according to the amount of his continued strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wants to open his arm after the first bleeding and he has a strong body, then let him bleed at .VII. hours after the first bleeding or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to bleed elsewhere, they should bleed on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is a lot of blood inside the body which has been heated, and it causes fever; so you must draw out a large quantity, and widen the hole until it bleeds freely; then you should check all the conditions of bleeding, and put your hand on his pulse when he is bleeding, so that death does not come in the place of the wound, and this happens many times when the bleeding person is negligent; and you must not press hard when you see the arm loosening and the blood flowing out a second time, and the hole is closed, but you should put your hand on it gently; nor if it is crooked, should he stretch his arm suddenly, for that would be bad; but let him keep still until he bleeds again a second time; then you can touch it with the tip of a flame, so that the congealed blood at the hole of the vein melts away, and put some hot water on it, and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be so, and do not constrict it until the abscess has subsided.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to bleed again a second time, then open the vein in the same place, or another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The veins in the arms are bled in the area of the main vein because it is composed of smaller veins.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the method of bleeding is that the patient immerses his hand in hot water until the vein turns red; then he should be bled slowly, so that the vein appears clearly, and then he should be bled through the middle, not from the side or from above; and the incision should be wide, and bleeding should be done close to the joint of the hand, and if blood does not come out, then put the hand back in hot water and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough; and if it is winter, do not put the hand back in hot water, for it is put in there more in winter than in summer; and bleeding from this vein is safer than from any other vein, as there are no arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	Bleeding from the vein of the right little finger is beneficial for all diseases of the liver, and here is how it is done: stretch out the hand, and immerse it in hot water until the vein swells up, so that one can see it; then bleed it through the middle, and if you cut it across, it will do no harm; and do not cut too deeply, for the nerves are completely naked under the skin; then put the hand back in hot water if the blood has congealed in the wound and none comes out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as is necessary, then put oil and bandages on the vein to heal quickly, and do likewise for each vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The bleeding in the left hand is good for the disease of the mumps, and do everything just as I told you about the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The sauce of the sophia is good for all diseases that are underneath the body, such as diseases of the bowels, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of its sauce are such that the patient puts his foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it perishes, and ties over the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, and up the foot they go a lot of rains; heal it therefore at the widest rain, or at the ankle, whichever moves best.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal it on the foot, then guard against the nerves that are underneath, and heal it across as in chopping; and let the flames be extinguished.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot issue, then immerse the foot in water and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the healer fails the first time, he should start again the second time higher up, for the place is salty; and do not be afraid of nerves, as we have said, and likewise make the Sophia on the other foot equally.Et si li sainier ne peut le sainier si haut, qu’il face en bas de la jointure dou piet, car il n’i a pas de nerf, si com nos avons dit; et s’il n’est au piet, qu’il face a la cheville ou au rain, selon comme li voinne se muent le plus.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The location of the sciatic vein is at the ankle bone, and its pulse corresponds to the pain in the hip when there is hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its healing is such that the patient goes into the bath, and twists above the ankle IIII turns, for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then heal it in every way you can, and by crossing over; and it is better that you cover it, for the place is safe, and it is very relaxing for most people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not drain it, then heal any vein that opens on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and be careful of the nerves; and make the blood flow as much as you see fit, and then loosen the ligature, and place cotton on top and hold it tightly; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of cupping.
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping glasses are made from horns, or brass, or glass; and cupping is done according to two methods: either by cutting and drawing blood, or without cutting.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping which is done without bleeding is done in two ways: with or without fire; and the cupping that is done by bleeding and by extraction of blood is performed at 14 places on the body, one of which is in the middle of the head; and another in the neck; and two more on either side of the neck; and a cupping jar under the chin; and two more on the shoulders; and two more on the buttocks; and two more on the thighs; and two more on the calves; and a cupping jar on each ankle; and the cupping does not treat any blood except for small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and because of this it does not weaken at all, as is done with bleeding; and it should not be administered, neither with fire nor without, in any disease that comes from fullness, until the whole body has been emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if by necessity of illness it is necessary to bleed, or due to habits, then we shall bleed each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and among them and in every time; for there are some who, when they need to bleed, have a heavy head; and there are some who experience fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes; and some who experience a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and bleed; and there are those who dream, and see through the night blood and wounds and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is during the full moon, we command them to bleed after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	Bleeding from the nose helps with headaches ... that comes to the eyes, and it should not be after the evacuation of the whole body; and this ventilation is in the place of bleeding from the head, and one who has a cold complexion or catarrh should not use it, for it does them great harm; and so the elderly should not use it, nor those with cold diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who are often bled should become unconscious, and so one should place the leech further down due to the fear of oblivion.Et si li maux sunt de la sainie de la cephalique, si convient mettre la ventouse en leu de la sainie de l’estomac, ou de la sainie du coeur, ou de la sainie des reins, ou de la sainie des poumons.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation in the neck is located at the junction of the neck and basilic veins, and because of this, it helps with swelling in the feet, and splitting of the channels of the lungs, and with congestion and fullness; and one should not press on it too hard, for if it is pressed too firmly, it can cause injury to the stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventilation at the level of the second rib in the neck helps with headaches, and eye pain and inflammation, and with strangulation, and tooth pain, and is located where the basilic vein drains; and you should instruct the surgeon to express his hand while placing it so that he does not compress the artery and cause bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	Ventilation under the chin is beneficial for diseases of the mouth, and gum corruption, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is located in the veins of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Ventilation at the armpits is beneficial for diseases that arise from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The ventilation in the armpits is like three veins in the arm, as it draws blood from these large veins; and instruct the surgeon not to pierce too deeply, for the area is naked of flesh, and underneath are nerves and arteries.Li ventosation dou chief si vaut a toust et a repletion des pormons, et a dolors de dent, et est en leu de la sainie dou pis, et li dolors del col; et covient que tu comandes qu’il ne fere mie trop em parfont, car il y a ners et arteres.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping glass placed on the back is useful for hemorrhoids and diseases underneath, and it must be large, made of brass, and well-made; and if it is too thin, it may break and cause large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	Cupping glasses on the legs heal very well, as they draw blood from throughout the body, and are effective for old pains in the joints, and in the hips, and in the bladder, and they relieve swelling; they are located at the .ij. sophenes, and the .ij. ankles, and they weaken the body after a long time, and bring about fainting in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The manner of applying the cupping-glass is to place it first empty, and draw gently, and apply it firmly, and move it evenly, and do not cease doing this until you see the part become red and swollen, and the blood appear; then stop, and remove the cups, and take care in dealing with the body, for there are those who have thin skin and large pores: therefore one should only strike once, and make large wounds, and a little deep; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, one should strike twice: the first time to open the way for the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very thick, one should strike a third time; and when we want to draw blood little by little, we only need to strike once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want a lot of blood, we bleed often; and if the blood is thick, we pierce it with a needle, and the end is that the heart is pierced suddenly, and it suits those who have thick and tough skin and narrow pores, that you grease the ends of the cups with aperitif and dissolutive oil: if it is in summer, with violet oil, or almond oil, or squash seed oil; and if it is in winter, with watercress oil, or lily, or camomile, or similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the person has a gross and cold surplus, take oil of wormwood, or of balsam, or aniseed oil, and similar oils.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if those who are bled have tender skin and large pores, no oil should be used, but they should be washed after cupping with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or squash water, or porcelain water, or similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have a lot of moisture, if they rise from aspen, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large superfluities should rise from old wine, or from pure water, or from a decoction of anise or camomile, or other similar things; and one should not bleed with a cupping glass before the bath or em bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and one should not sleep after venting, and it is necessary that he should warm himself when he is to be bled and when he has been bled.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And guard against those who are bled being constipated, and if the blood is too sharp and inflamed; one should then eat cold things like pomegranates, endives, lettuce with garlic, and similar things; also drink little, and eat the meat of young birds, and moist foods.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those of a cold complexion should drink honey syrup, and moderate old wine, and young, and eat soup, and the meat of young birds and pigeons; and on the day that one is bled, one should drink more than eat; and it is fitting to give some people treacle or musk before bleeding, or after, to strengthen the principal members; and warm the blood, but those of a hot complexion should not drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The cupping glasses that are placed to cause bleeding are those placed on the liver, and on the mumps, and on the gout, and on the belly and the belly and the thighs and the hips, because these members do not endure being hurt under the eyes, and it is not done except to attract blood from one member to another, as we put it on the breasts when the nipples are healthy; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we place cupping glasses on the belly and on the belly to make the member smaller; and it removes pain when there is congestion or stone, or perhaps the congestion, or desert the stone from its place; and so does she when one is placed on the liver and on the mumps when there is retained flatulence, and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water, as in diseases of the pleurisy, and in such a way one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or with water in which suitable herbs have been cooked for this.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the fire cupping is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it has a width of two inches and a half palm deep, and on the side around the middle there is a small hole, as well as to push a needle, and it is made of bronze, smooth in front so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb; and in the middle there is a crossbar of bronze or iron, to place a candle, and they are both large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them; for the ventouses of children are different from the old, and of the thin from the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And you should thus place this ventouse on the limb: take the candle of wax or the linen, and put it inside the ventouse through the bar in the middle of the ventouse, so that the flame is at the bottom of the ventouse so that it does not burn the patient; then put it on the limb, and you must place your fingers over the hole we mentioned, so that when one wishes, the vapor can go out, and remove the ventouse; and take the linen as before, and repeat it often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	Therefore the cupping glass which is administered for pleurisy, for all aquosity, has neither rod nor perforation, and is not released until it is full of water, and is placed on the limb only in this way; and that is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Leeches are not released until in members where one cannot place cupping glasses due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in bare flesh, such as toes or nipples, and others like them; and the quality of their use is that when you find leeches that are in clean, fresh water without any foreign matter, take them; and put one into fresh water, until they become familiarized, and do not move around; then cleanse the vein with a cut and cupping, then rub the member until it turns red, and place the leeches on top; and when they are full and stick, if it is a place where one can apply cupping, then do so, for it is much better.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, then raise the area with ash, and then with water, very well, and then compress it; and if the bite is too low on the body of the leech, moisten a linen cloth in cold water, and place it over the bite until the leech is suffocated; and if there are many leeches, place ground vitriol, or gall, and similar things, over the area until they are suffocated; or place half a handful of peeled beans over the area and leave them until they turn red on the spot, and it will now stop bleeding; and if you need more, take other leeches.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the leeches will not attach, then rub the area with fresh blood, or prick it with a needle so that some blood comes out, and then place them over the area, and as soon as they smell the blood, they will attach; and when you see that they are defecating, sprinkle powdered aloe and salt, or ashes, over them, and they will stop now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is a remedy for fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that the foolish people wonder at this chapter, which they have never seen in any of the ancient books, nor have they read any letters; and for this reason, science is strange in our land, for I have never found any good ones; and I know nothing about them, except through the science of the ancient books, in which I have studied so much that I have acquired knowledge, and through experience and the habit of my life. And I have described to you in this chapter what is contained in it, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I have done in the two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we should say in the prologue of this book the sum of its contents and the chapters in which the wise man places his understanding, and dwells upon its truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or break occurs in someone, you must hurry to treat the patient from both sides, if nothing else prevents it, such as weakness of the body, or youth, or old age; and if the weather is not very hot or too cold; and eat cool foods, namely cold joints, and bird and deer meat, and drink no wine, nor eat any greasy foods, and do not fill yourself too much with food that fills the veins with blood, until you have a doubt about a hot abscess or an outbreak of material in the limb; then let the patient return to his former regimen.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, one should feed the patient foods that promote swelling, or that have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and testes, and feet, and cow's stomach, and offal, and fresh fish, and wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with much swelling the fracture is reduced more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well healed or joined according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children; but have no fear, reset the broken bone, using the large tendons which stretch and join the limb together, so that it is forced into its former position; and do not stop at any point in his work, and for this reason, one should eat lots of meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And you should know that fractures can occur in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For a fracture of the head is different from a fracture of the foot, or leg; and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another in crushing, like the crack in a quill used for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And there is a fracture with a wound, and a complete fracture is a clean break.Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And in every way, there is its own method and proper instrument for restoration, according to what the memory brings to mind; and the fracture of the bone is known by its being twisted, and clearly apparent by touch, and sounding when pressed with the hand; and if there is no twisting or feeling in the touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture; but it can have twisting, or splitting, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You must not move it with your hand, but apply remedies that come later, and then hold it still very gently.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And you should know that the fracture that goes into the bone, and the two parts are separated, they must now be set equal, so that hot abscesses come; and if cold abscesses come, let it rest for a day, until the abscess is relieved; then set it equal to the move that you can make easily and without bleeding, and know that the restoration of this one is easier than the restoration of the one with pieces; then constrict it as it should be done afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, whether it is in two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or a small member, or on two strings, or on one string and your hand; and set the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are separated, you bring them back together by all means into their places as you can, and be careful that your work does not cause injury or pain to the patient; and join the two heads of the bones well according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel it with your hand if it seems to you that it is not well aligned; then adjust it properly, and do not pull or press too hard, as those who cause hot abscesses and contractions in the limb by their treatment, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the member is at its worst, then treat the patient well so that he does not move it, whether waking or sleeping, turning or otherwise; and be sure that the member is so secure that he feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, then it is not at its worst, and you should put him in such a position that he feels no pain; and be careful that he is placed straight so that no crookedness comes to it when it is restored; and the qualities of the broken member are according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken members vary in smallness and size and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Because there are small members, such as arms and legs and the like: these should be wrapped with soft, thin linen; and for larger ones, such as thighs and legs, use a wide, strong bandage, for wide bandages embrace the whole large member and constrict it from all sides equally so that there is no swelling; then wrap around it light bandages, three or four times according to the member, and tighten your hand a little on all of the bandage, then go above the break and tighten less, so that the break moves away a little; then soften the bandage little by little, until you grasp most of the healthy area, then take another bandage, and wrap around again over the broken area; then go to the part below the break, and tighten gently, not too tightly or too loosely, as we said above in the first hour; then put between the bandages linen or bandages, so that they are all even, then tie it all up with a bandage on top, and then put your splints well-made on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, place something hot that soothes the abscess and reduces the swelling for a few days; then strain it over a fire, and let it be of medium thickness, made from a cane, or wood used for making clubs, or palm fronds, and let it be in this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	but the splint that is placed on the fracture should be a little thicker and wider than the others; and it should be as long as necessary for the size of the member, small or large; then strain it over the fire as before, then bind it with a thread appropriately, as in the first instance above the fracture; the tighter it is bound, the better; and the thread must be medium thickness, not too thin nor too thick, and made of soft flax; for if the threads are thick, as I have seen fools make their bandages with cords of twisted flax, this is a great error, for the bandage cannot be even if it is too thin, and there should be no less than two fingers' width between each splint.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is raw under the splints after the dislocation, then put beneath them flax or lambswool, so that it does not blister.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a fracture, and the hernia is broken, I will describe the treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And you should not extract all the broken bones on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	Because when the member is swollen, one should not put a poultice on it until after five or seven days, or more depending on the nature of the abscess and the heat that arises from it; and here is the way of ancient poultices to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: take flour that is found on the walls of the mill, and cook it with an abundance of eggs, and apply this preparation, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it. This is the common way of the poultice that restores fractures in various situations, and especially in women and small children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of plaster that restores broken bones and dislocation and twisting: take 3 parts each of elderberries, ladanums, aniseed and asafoetida, and gum arabic; myrrh and aloes, each 5 parts; alechi 8 parts; grind them into powder and mix with egg white. If the person's complexion is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and it restores broken bones until they heal, and benefits many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way of poultice that is good for twists: take myrrh and viscum album, each 10 drams; myrrh and aloes, each 9 drams; açaç 6 drams; Armenian bole 10 drams, and grind well, and cook with water or an abundance of eggs, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method of plaster for joints and bones displaced from their places, and to soothe the resulting pain, and for fractures: take new lamb's wool, and moisten it in oil and cook it, and apply it to the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not restore, but it is good for soothing hot abscesses and removing pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take dry fig leaves and deadnettle leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster out of it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of plaster for the restoration of fractures and to reduce swelling from an abscess: take equal parts honey and vinegar, cook in oil, and apply it to the affected area.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take the root of mallows, chamomile, violets flowers, and wheat flour, in equal parts; grind them and cook with wine, and if the member is scalded, cook with coriander water or water, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another stronger method of plaster for when there is a tough abscess in the restoration of a member: take equal parts of honey, vinegar, and oil; cook them, strain, and apply it to the affected area. It also helps with fractures and dislocations.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take the roots of comfrey, and flax seed, borage, milk thistle, and dandelions, and flowers of violets and chamomile; of each take one part. Crush them, and cook with salted water, or fresh water, or wine, depending on the heat of the member, and its condition.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hypochares says in his book that one should not put anything on the broken member except to restore it with a cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and that it be kept between two things, neither too soft nor too hard.Quant l’homme ou la feme est prestes a la mort, et sent le corps fraich et colde, et ne se remue plus, prene une foye et li foyez les culles, et le cul de la foye metez sus li petiz orifices qui sont en haut li corps, si com est entre li coudes, sus li poilz de la teste, sus li petiz orifices qui sont pres l’ombelice; et les culles li metes sus li petiz orifices qui sont pres li codres.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen says that one should put on the broken member, to restore it, dry things that are slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense, and similar things, as we have said.Quant l’homme ou la feme est prestes a la mort, et sent le corps fraich et colde, et ne se remue plus, prene une foye et li foyez les culles, et le cul de la foye metez sus li petiz orifices qui sont en haut li corps, si com est entre li coudes, sus li poilz de la teste, sus li petiz orifices qui sont pres l’ombelice; et les culles li metes sus li petiz orifices qui sont pres li codres.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of ointment that is good for injury and pain: take mugwort and human hair, or bird feathers, and bee's wax, and mix them together, and grind them, and make an ointment from it and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then loosen it a little after, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is the bone moved from its place; if not, loosen it with your hands again in a few days. And if pain comes to the site, or itching, without rest or swelling, hurry up and loosen it, and remove the ointment immediately; and take light cloth, and sponge of sea moistened, and dip it in water, and raise the site until the itching ceases, and the pain is soothed; then let the member rest for an hour, then apply a poultice of dry linen, moistened with water or rose oil, and bind it on a nut, until you are sure of the hot abscess; and the inflammation of the member subsides, and the pain is removed, then begin the binding gently again, and a little of the ointment, and do not tighten it as much as before; and gently until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, and you need ointment and bandages, then restart it, just as you did before.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	If the limb does not receive anything from what we have said, do not dislodge it for three, four, five or seven days; and sometimes leave it for twenty days, depending on what one sees, until the fracture heals and the bone approaches the flesh; then restrain it more than before, and increase its meat, as I have said before; and if you see the site drier than necessary, know that nourishment cannot come to it; wet it therefore with warm water every time you dislodge it, and do this every third day, and loosen a little the bandage; by this action, nourishment comes to the limb, and it improves quickly what the foolish do, who restore the limb crookedly: this is bad, and it is a fearful action, and I see nothing in it but weariness and doing it correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of the various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many types of fractures, with distinct causes and appearances. Some fractures are caused by the impact of a sword, breaking the bone all the way to the socket, as with an axe or club; this type of fracture is called a "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword cuts the bone without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called "surface fracture"; and the wound from these two fractures can be large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a concussive impact, or a cleaving or collar-bone fracture from stone, or from falling on stone, or other similar injuries.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating fracture which approaches the membrane under the bone, or it is on top of the bone; and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is repented in the bone as thin as a hair, and the crack is small, then this type of fracture is called  "capillary". If the wound is made by stone, or by falling, or by a similar object, and the bone piece goes inward, and the site is smooth like the blacksmiths when they work on pots; then the bone piece goes inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more often in people with soft bone tissue at the top of the skull, like children's skulls; and it happens to all types of fractures that small pieces are dislocated, as I will explain later.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all kinds of fractures by the distraction over them, and the interrogation under a tent, and through the corruption of the flesh that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hairline fracture is discovered when one uncovers the bone and rubs it, and a black line appears.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fractures, be careful of bad omens from the patient, and if you see any harmful signs, such as vomiting blood, loss of consciousness, swelling, fever, eyes popping out, or similar signs in various conditions, then they cannot heal without a doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you don't see any frightening signs and you hope for a cure, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the newborn comes to you first, and it is winter, you should remove the foreskin before the fourteenth day when you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the spring, you should remove the foreskin before the seventh day so that the skin under the foreskin does not rot and the complications we have mentioned arise.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone comes to the membrane that covers the brain, then you should split the split part thus: and it is that you grasp the head of the injured person, and expose the bone in every way you can, and over the wound more gently than you can, and if bleeding occurs when exposing the bone, or if an abscess forms, use the aid that is appropriate. Then fill the area with soft rags soaked in rosemary oil; and let the wound rest until the abscesses are soothed and bleeding stopped; then begin around the bone to remove, and it is done according to two ways of doing: one way is to cut tightly before, and that is the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then [you cut] another slit larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you have various cuts, some narrow and some wide, and they are pointed and made of iron; and work gently so that you do not bleeding the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is thick and hard, you must pierce it all around, so that you apply cuts with chisels, not so deep that they go through the bone, and you should have a rim or circle on top, preventing the point from going through the bone; and you should have several of these, so that each one comes in the thickness of the bone, so that you have chisels for all parts of the head. And this is the shape of the 3 types of chisels:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities for piercing around the broken bone are that you place a probe on the bone and move it with your fingers until you know the bone is pierced; then move the probe elsewhere a little later, and do this all around; then cut into the space between the bones with your incision tools as subtly and lightly as you can, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or with one of the instruments you have, like tweezers or pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sinus.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and split the bone, it is fitting that you remove the sharpness that remains on the bone with any other tool resembling a chisel, but it should be more blunt and more delicate than the other chisels; and if anything of the small bones or scales remain, lightly remove them with one of these tools; then cure the wound with tenting and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of treatment, which Galen describes and highly recommends, is as follows:
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	First you must uncover a part of the bone where the fracture is open, so that when you have uncovered that part, you place under it the head of this lens-shaped instrument, which has this shape.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	Do not cut from one side only, as the tendon is underneath the bone in two places, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then gently tap with a small mallet, so that you lightly strike the bone all around, and be careful of the tendon which is underneath. If it is stuck to the bone, gently loosen it, for it can be loosened without harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce all the way to the membrane, and it is only cut slightly on top, and there are small pieces, then one must smooth out that roughness, and remove the scales with a very subtle rasp; one must have various sizes according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you use a large razor at first, then one that is more delicate, and do not stop doing this until it is good.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair-cutting and shaving techniques, you must adapt to the individual, and this is something that cannot be taught to one who has not devoted themselves to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the ulcer is exposed, you should take a piece of linen according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it over the wound; then take another piece of linen folded in two or three times, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first piece of linen; and do this as gently as you can, so that you do not put too much pressure on the ulcer, then apply another bandage above, without tightening it more than is necessary to hold the wound; and leave it like this for one or two days, until the abscesses are soothed, then loosen it, and apply medicines such as lilium roots, and wheat flour, and incense powder, and aristologus, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and apply it to the wound, and then apply other medicines without biting; and guard that the wound is clean, so that you do not leave the ointment on it, nor allow any pus to gather, for when pus gathers above the membrane of the brain, it hardens and ruptures, and causes great harm to the patient; for when something biting is applied to the ulcer, it softens from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care therefore, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, without a doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if blackness does not come, but only because of the medicine that one has applied to it, may such a virtue have, then you should take some honey, and three parts of rose oil and glue a piece of cloth, and put it on the ulcer; then heal it in ways that are appropriate, until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose are broken, one only, for there are two bones; and below is cartilage, which does not break, but only swells or becomes dislocated, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should boil your little finger or toe, and put the break inside your index finger, and the poultice with force, until the nail returns according to its natural shape; and do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the part above the teeth, and the jaw cannot reach its place, then you should put it equal to the head of a rather thick rod.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is on both sides, then do the same thing, and try to restore it on the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscesses are resolved, then boil at the top of the nail a tent of linen cloth, if the break is in one part.And if the break is on both sides, then do the same thing, and try to restore it on the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscesses are resolved, then boil at the top of the nail a tent of linen cloth, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you attach one to another side, if the fracture is there; and let the tenters be so thick that they fill the holes of the jaw.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some restorers say that one must wet the bandages with butter, and change them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It doesn't seem right to me, but one should wet the bandages in egg white and flour paste; then leave the bandage until the bone is set and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes feathers of geese are put in place of bandages, and over this a silk cloth is wound around, and the fracture is bound tightly, and the patient breathes through it; now do as you will.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if hot abscesses come to the ears while you are working there, then put cerate or cotton soaked in rose oil, or a poultice of diaquilone.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a hard abscess comes, then apply a poultice of honey and flour, and incense powder, mixed with egg white; then put over it light wool pads, and do not tie the bandage; and if the fracture in the bone is small, and it is broken into small pieces, extract it with appropriate instruments, then cut the wound, and cure it with warm things, and binding, as with poultices and ointments appropriate to this purpose; and if there is no wound inside the nose, then cure it with bandages, and put in splints of wood, until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	Regarding the dislocation of the jaw:
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is dislocated beneath and there is no external wound, and the dislocation is only slight without any fracture, they can be recognized easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, to put your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is on the left jaw, put your right index finger, and gently push the fracture inside, and make it even with the other hand by force.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is displaced in [one of two places], then you must administer extension in one part, so that it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement of the teeth, or splitting, then they must be restrained with a thread of gold or silver or silk; then put a cerote on the broken jaw, and place upon it a double piece of cloth; and upon the cloth, place a large well-made splint, or a piece of leather of equal length and width according to the jaw, and bind it in place as tightly as you can; and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the shape is changing, then loosen it on the third day, and then put back into place what has changed; and apply a poultice over it, made of powdered millstone with an abundance of egg or flour of salsify, after you have removed the cerote; and upon the poultice, apply a thin layer of lamb's wool, and if the poultices become soiled, and the condition of the patient does not change, leave it as long as it takes for him to recover; many times recovery takes place within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if hot abscesses arise, then administer what we have said many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a break and wound together, examine whether any piece of bone has been removed; then remove it subtly with suitable instruments for this purpose.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then widen it with flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and there remains none, then sew up the wound, if it is wide, and place upon it suitable poultices to encourage scabs, until it is healed.
de la forcele	of the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forceps breaks in several ways in front of the shoulder, and the break is according to three patterns: it can be broken and separated into two pieces, which is the easiest to restore; or there can be a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the procedure is as follows when the break is without a wound: you need two assistants, one of whom holds the shoulder where the forceps are broken, and the other stretches the neck towards the affected part; then, with your fingers, bring the broken pieces together so that the joint is in the correct position, with no visible gap or misalignment.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	If you need to extend the joint further, place a round pillow of cloth or fabric under the shoulder, and make it as thick as necessary; then release the forceps and hold the pillow in your hand, bringing the broken pieces together so that they are aligned correctly.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder out of its socket because it comes in deeply, then the patient should lie on his back, and put one ear to the ground, and the minister should push the shoulder down while lifting the bone of the shoulder.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then you should apply the fracture with your fingers, and if you find it broken, then you must split it; gently pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot join because of an overgrowth, then cut it at one of the incisions you have made; but put this instrument under the shoulder to ward off the syphilis:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	It should be the size of a spoon, not shaved down, and as wide as is necessary according to the size of the bone and the extent of the work; it has two heads, as you can see, one wide and the other narrow, like the path of the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are sure of the hot abscess, cut open the wound, and if the path is small or you doubt the hot abscess, then close the wound with bandages and tents according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if there are deep abscesses, moisten a cloth in rose oil and vinegar and wine, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The dislocation of the bone, when there is no wound or fracture, is to put on the bone the plaster made from mill powder and egg white, and place light sponges on top, and if necessary, put a splint under the sore; then take a very wide band, about a palm's width, and place two layers of cloth over the sponges and plaster; then take a slender rod, three fingers in width and length, and wrap it around the band so that the ends of the band hang down; and place the rod on the fracture, and wrap the band around the neck, and under the healthy shoulder blade, and under the sore shoulder blade; and adjust each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the fracture in alignment, and you clearly see that the rod is not moving over the broken bone, then re-bandage it every day, and when the ligament loosens, restrain it; and have the patient lie on his back, and place a small pillow under the shoulder blade while he sleeps, to raise the shoulder; thus the dislocation will be healed by the alignment of the shoulder joint, or tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it if an evil accident does not occur, until the twentieth day; then start the plaster again, if you see that it is needed, and adjust it thus, until it is healed; and it is usually healed within twenty-eight days, and less for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	from the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	It happens that the shoulder is broken or widely displaced, and it is not set except by touch; then shape the apparatus according to the pattern of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in every way you can; then put powdered flour from the mill with plenty of egg white over the area, and apply light poultices, and place a double layer of cloth over them; then place a large and thin plaster over the shoulder, slightly larger than the shoulder itself, and if there is a swelling underneath the plaster anywhere on the shoulder, fill that hollow with a poultice of linen until the plaster sits level; then hold it firmly in place with a large bandage, so that the plaster does not move from its position, and check the bandage every day; whenever it becomes loose, tighten it again, and if the plaster is displaced, adjust it to its proper position, and let the patient lie on his side; the shoulder will be restored within 20 or 25 days. And when this period is complete, remove the bandage, and be confident, for this is not a bone that sets easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone protrudes forward, and not under the heart, they should cut it off, and the bone, and do what we have said about relieving the hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	from the break in the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The penis is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; it more often breaks at the tip.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it bends downward, and the patient feels great pain, and loses urine, and is constipated, and perhaps vomits blood, and the hair grows on the broken bone, and he feels little good.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is for the patient to lie on his back, and place a pillow between his shoulders, then press the shoulders together and bring the ribs close together with his hands, making sure that the bones are in their proper position; then he should apply plasters and bandages over the broken bone, using salt or some other light material, and wrap it in a cloth, binding it firmly to the bone so that it does not move; then he should bind the linen tightly around the waist, and every hour loosen the binding, and if it softens, tighten it again; and if it needs to be loosed for corrosion or itching that comes to the area, or pain or abscess, then he should hurry and loosen it, and wash away what has come out from the wound, and dress it according to the various methods of treatment; then re-apply the plaster, and tighten it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the fracture of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that rib fractures occur only in the large ribs near the back, and in the upper part inside, and they bend only because they are slippery; and one feels it well on examination at both ends.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatment is that you set the break evenly as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply the ointment and bind it with a bandage if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the rib fracture is bent inward, then the patient feels great pain and piercing, as with pleurisy, for the bone punctures the lining; and he has difficulty breathing, and coughs up a great quantity of blood, and it is a serious illness, and the ancient physicians placed great importance on it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if one has a fracture, they say that one should eat foods that bloat the belly, to force out the broken bone.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make hot poultices unless an abscess is already there.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it is there, then we cleanse it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some say that one should place leeches on the site to draw out pus, and this is reasonable; however, there is a risk that the leech will attract excess fluids due to the weakness of the patient.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some say that one should cover the place with soft wool soaked in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make the area around even, then it should be bandaged with a bandage of pleurisy, meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure because of the bone that points through the bandage, and there is doubt about the patient, then one should split above the broken rib, and put an instrument underneath to ward off the syphilis; then one must cut the bone and pull gently, and then sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and dress the wound with ointments until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the hot abscesses come, then put on wet clothes in rosemary oil, and put it on the spot; and cure the area around the abscess as needed, and let him lie still on his side where he should, until he is healed.
de la brisure dou col	about the fracture of the neck:
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes there is a break in the bones of the neck, and it can bend; and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take note if you see his hands soft, swollen, and numb, and he cannot move them or stretch them, and when you prick him with a needle, he does not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is deadly in many cases, and if he moves his hands and feels the pain when you dislocate them and press on them, know that the joint of the bone is safe, and that the disease is healed if you apply a cure to it.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar condition occurs in the spine of the back, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take note if his feet are numb, and if the symptoms are in his hands, and there is vomiting and diarrhea without volition; and when he lies on his stomach, there is also diarrhea without volition.Et si li accident i sont en la cief, et tu vuoils savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si luy fay sovinir sus ses piez, et met li piez dous draps moilliez, et luy fay boire vin de venie; et quant il a esteit sovineit, si luy fay boire un peu de vin, et quant il s’est traicteit, si prend li piez et les remue, et li dis que li piez sont moilliez.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is laying on his back and he wants to sit up, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	You should know that it is deadly; therefore do not labor over its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if these signs do not occur, the condition is more mild.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that you apply a hot poultice to the spine if there is an abscess, using rose oil or egg yolk oil until it is soothed; then apply one of the comforting and drying poultices, and bind it with a bandage, and command the patient to rest; and let him not sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is dislocated, one should cover it with the palm of one's hand; and remove the bone, then join the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a single stitch, then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the 'head of the cow', put your thumb in your left hand, and place it equally in your right hand, then apply the plaster and bandage on top, if you need to; then bind it tightly, and if there are bones dislocated, do the same, then remove them, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Sometimes the hip bone is fractured, and if it does, there will be a slight shrinking at the head; and it will bend to one side, and the patient feels pain in that spot, and there will be a point and swelling where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And its restoration is that you extend your hand over it, so that you are on the fracture; and you know which is the fracture and the shape of it; and if the fracture is only at the head, then put that fracture in line with the rest of the bone so that it is in a natural shape.Et si la brisure est au pardedens soulement, si met cele sus le chief tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it inclines inward, then have the patient lie on his stomach until the setting of that fracture is prepared.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it straight, then apply the plaster, and then place a wooden or leather splint on top, and bind the fracture so that it does not move; and apply the linen under the rib cage until the fracture is healed.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if painful bumps appear, do not touch them until the painful bumps are soothed, and apply what we have described earlier; then return to the healing process, and bind it as it should be, if there is no bad outcome; and that is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The adjutoires is that which is between the neck and the head of the shoulder; and if it is broken, one should restore it according to one of two methods. The first is that you take a rod straight and smooth, according to this form:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two ends with ropes and raise them up, and seat the patient on a chair; then let him gently hang his broken arm over the rod, until it comes to rest, and have a curve in the rod, then let him lean back onto something heavy or let his ministers hold him down; then let his assistants bring the broken joint together as evenly as possible, so that the joint returns to its proper place.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that one supports the patient on his back, and ties his hand to his neck, then let one minister hold what is above the break in his hands, and the other minister hold below at the end of the rod, and each pulls their respective ends.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more difficult, then press the ligament below the fracture and above it, and stretch each of the ministers to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, you should place one ligament in the middle of the dislocation and another towards the neck under the fracture; and likewise, if the fracture is towards the neck, then gently place a ligament without exertion, so that the fracture remains even under the shoulder and the neck; then even out the fracture as it should be, and bind it, if no abscesses appear.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if hot abscesses come, do not tighten it for 7 days; then put cool linen in vinegar and rose oil on the hot abscesses until they are soothed; then tighten it, and the manner of tightening is that you put the plaster on the fracture, then raise the arm onto the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or breast; and put a cloth, and press onto the shoulder and the arm so that the arm is in its natural place, unless something keeps it from being so, or if the bone is displaced.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone is moving, use splints, and put a wider and stronger splint on the fracture, with a space of two fingers between each splint, and let each splint be as long so that it passes the fracture by three inches on each side; then tighten onto the splints as I said at the beginning of the chapter, more firmly and less in moving away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see that the bones are settled and bound as we have said, during the hour that you restore the broken member, and you suspect a hot abscess, then leave it bound until the seventh day as we have said; then examine the bandage every third day so that itching or swelling does not occur at the site, or that the nutrients cannot reach the member because it is too tight.Et se li prurite ou enflement viegne, si doit tu deffaire li membre, et le lavere en ches k’il est estrois et asserate, et li membredre apes le leu luisant; puis le laisse secher et remets liien sanz liier, si com il est igal.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If it dislocates, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents occur, then do not release it until three days or more have passed, and let the patient sleep on his back, and place his hands on his stomach; and put underneath the shoulder a pillow filled with wool of equal thickness, and check every hour during the day or night that the dislocated member does not move, or soften the ligaments; then release it using medicine, and give him the food we mentioned earlier, in such a way that the food is very subtle at first; and when he begins to recover, make it thicker.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to be reset after 40 days of healing; then one should release it and administer baths and ointments to encourage healing.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stricture is bad and blocked, it will remain for days or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the breaking of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "bone-pair"; one is small and lies beneath the armpit, and the other is large and lies beneath the small bone; sometimes only the large bone breaks, or the small one, and sometimes both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, their restoration is easy and healing quick; but when the large bones are broken, healing is more difficult, and it takes longer than when they are only bruised.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the small bone that is broken, then it should be extended gently and placed evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large bone, then it should be pulled more forcefully; and he should lie on his back, with his affected arm raised above the others, and his small fingers lower than the other fingers, and he should cross his legs over his chest, and the pillow under his head for support so that he does not struggle; then the assistant should raise the unaffected arm up towards the affected hand, or towards the elbow, and another assistant should push down on the arm above the affected one.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then let him examine it evenly, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the breaking there are pieces, one places each in its place, and if there is any dislocation that pinches the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then split it along the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken singularly about it in this chapter; then take the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of the healing there are hot abscesses, apply a poultice made from rosemary oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft; and place the poultice gently on top, until the hot abscesses are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the cerote, and apply the plaster made from mill-powder with beaten egg, then place the splints, and let the splint of the fracture be slightly larger and stronger; and let there be six splints on the arm in various positions: whether the fracture is in one bone or two; and tighten more over the fracture than elsewhere, lessening the tightness as it heals, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter. Let the linen underneath be soft and moist, not hard or rough; and let the string used to tighten the splints be made of flax, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And then examine the member and the ligament after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident happens to the member, such as itching coming to the member, then you should wet the member with warm water until those itches are relieved; and let the member not be tightly bound but rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then restart the binding, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones separated, and similar things, then address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you see that the nourishment cannot come to the member because it is too bound, then you must soften it a little, and leave it thus for several days, until the nourishment runs to it, and then tighten it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not release him until 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Or if in what we have said there is no improvement for the patient, then he can use his hands around his neck and his neck should be even, and he should guard against movement and shaking, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture will be healed in 30 days or 35 at most, and perhaps in 20 days according to the compositions and complexes of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that in the back of the hand and around the fingers there are few fractures, and they only come from bending many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, then the patient should stretch his arm out straight in front of him evenly; then he should put his hand on the ground, and stretch out the broken bones, and put them back together evenly, the minister, as far as the injury extends; and if there are no abscesses, then put on a plaster and bandages; then wrap it in a single linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is in the peritoneum around the abdomen of the plant, make a bandage of rags, and instruct the patient to press it against his broken plant; then squeeze it with a long strip of cloth, and let the mark of the finger be as large as the palm of the hand, and squeeze it as it should be.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the arm, you must put a splint on top and another underneath in the plant, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it all around the hand and stop the bleeding between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture is in one of the fingers, if it's the thumb, set it straight as it should be and then squeeze the hand, and if you see fit, put a small straight splint to raise the fracture and keep it from moving; and if the fracture is in any other finger, such as the index or another, set it straight and bind it with the finger next to it; or bind them all together while holding it steady, or you can put a splint on top of the finger like a thumb; take care in the restoration and treatment of a hot abscess, and treat any pus that arises as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bones of the thigh are often broken, and one can see this when they bend forward and backward; and their healing is by binding one band above the fracture, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And let the patient lie on his face, then extend each band equally to their respective parts; and this is how it is done when the fracture is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, let one ligature be towards the armpit and the other ligature below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And likewise if it is near the knee, let the ligature be beyond the knee, and let the extension be below; then the surgeon puts his fingers on the bone, making it equal to his two hands, until it is according to its natural figure, and then put on the plaster, and the bandage, if no abscess comes out.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if the patient has a hot abscess, then let it subside and then return to your treatment and care; the bandage is done in the following way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	You should wrap a folded bandage two or three times around the fracture, and leave the excess, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the thigh, and tie a long thread between the thigh and the leg beyond the knee, and bring the ends of the thread up above; then go back over the leg and the thigh with the bandage, then put splints on the fracture, and put one splint on the bone of the leg; then press the area firmly between the leg and the thigh with soft pieces of cloth to even out the pressure, then start binding the fracture firmly three or four times; and the more you go up from the fracture, the less you should bind it; then tie the two ends of the thread which you have put through between the leg and the thigh, then put on three splints that are above, then go back to below the end of the thread, so that you come to the foot; and bind it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that no abscess or swelling or anything similar comes.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if something happens, then loosen it and adjust what has happened, as we have said many times before; and if there are pieces of bone that are poking out, they should be removed if possible; if not, the area should be split open and drained, and the wound treated as we have described, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	Sometimes the thigh is broken like this when splints are put on, as in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, when restored in this way, it does not harm the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And you should know that the neck is restored within a day, or less or more, depending on the different complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the groove of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the knee joint there is little breaking, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is only a split, or a hole, and it happens with all wounds, whether with or without pain, and everyone feels it.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is to put it back in place with tweezers, as long as he can; then put on the ointment, and if necessary, put a round splint, and bind it as it should be, then follow all the instructions that we have given for other fractures, such as a hot abscess and similar; then treat each incident as appropriate, until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by right name 'mustelz', and the other is called 'foscile'; and all injuries occur as they do in the arm, and so its restoration is the same, and the works are all the same. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns over entirely.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if only the smaller bones are broken, then it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and one sees it well; and it turns underneath.Et s’il est brisiez li osses petits, si ne sent on pas dolor, et ne le voit on pas; et est tout auteil si com cele dou bras igalment.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Therefore bring about an extension, and make it even, and tie the bones evenly; but nevertheless, if the fracture is ugly, and there are several pieces, then the extension should be less and lighter; and adjust according to your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have finished your work, then take two wooden splints that prop up the leg on either side, and let them be as long as from the knee to below; then wrap two bands above and below, and tie it in the middle also, and at this time the leg will not decline to the right or left, and so it is well; and some administer a board as long as the leg, made of wood, and they put the leg upon it to guard against movement, and properly do they treat that in the fracture where there is pain; and move the leg every day to see if there is any hot abscess or other accident; and cure it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of bone fracture at the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but sometimes there is a bone fracture at the foot and in two ways, and there is no more force than that in many positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a fracture in the bone of the foot, and you see the bones on top of one another, then put the foot of the patient on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, and then put your own foot on top of his, where the bones are raised, then press down until they return to their places; then apply the ointment and bandages on top, and place a small wooden board with two flat sides underneath the belly of the foot, then bind it to the foot securely, and then wrap cloth and other materials around it as needed.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And after three or four days have passed, loosen the binding, for you will find the bones healed, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there is a broken bone in the toe, then set it as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place a splint along the length of the toe, and let it be slightly wider, then place underneath the foot that small board I mentioned earlier, and tighten it securely; and if there are one or two, or more, broken bones, then place a splint on each toe according to its size, wrapped in one piece of linen, and tighten the board underneath the foot; and let the top of the board press firmly against the belly of the foot.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, from what we have already discussed; and treat each incident as it should be treated.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	from the fracture of the bone in the shoulder
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman is broken, make her sit with her hips widened, then tilt her towards her back, and have her held from behind; then fill the wound with cotton, and place as many pebbles inside as there are bones; then help the woman to stand up, and gently loosen her back little by little, and thus the pebbles and cotton will come out as they enter the wound, and the bone will return to its place with them; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back in, and do this for seven days; then the fracture will be restored. Take a lamb's bladder, attach a cane to the opening, fill the bladder inside the wound; then blow into the cane forcefully, until the bladder is inflated inside: the bone will return to its place; then fill it with cotton, and leave it like that for a few days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the elbow of a man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said for the bone of the hip; and these breaks are not hidden from him who applies his study and understanding to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the breaks indicate in many ways the right path to restoration: understand it therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	For a broken penis, take a goose's gullet and insert it into the penis; then wrap it with cloth and leave it for three days, checking on it daily, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	One who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, like the fracture of the thigh or shoulder or similar, should be treated now, as the bleeding we have described attests.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound bleeds, then resume reducing the fracture in that same hour or that day, if no abscesses appear.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses appear, then leave the reduction until the next day, waiting for the abscesses to subside; do not touch or treat them on the third or fourth day, for you would risk causing a harmful incident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible on the uncovered chest, then you should gently put it in place with your hands, with a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not apparent to you for putting it in place with your hands, then reset it with this instrument made of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and its thickness depends on the size of the wound; and for this, the surgeon needs to cut a three-inch or four-inch piece, depending on how much he needs for each fracture treatment; and it should be round and slightly thick so that it does not bend under pressure on the affected limb during your work, and narrow in front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called 'dislocation', therefore the curved shoulder bone must be placed upon the head of the visible bone; and when it is put in once, so that it comes back, and is even with the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle, and the instrument cannot well seize the bone, then you must cut off the head of the bone, so that the instrument may have power over it.Et se li os ne voulent point prendre l’estrument, si covient que tu le brises a la fine qu’il soit igal a l’autre, et que li estrumens en ait possance.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot put the bone back in place as we have said, then cut it with an appropriate instrument, either an incision or a saw, to your ability; then remove what remains in the bone of sharpness and small fragments.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	Do this until it is in its place, then soak the cloth in black wine vinegar, and carefully clean it if there is a wound; do not apply ointment or anything else to the wound that might cause pus and corruption; then administer leeches after you have reset the bone, leave the wound uncovered, and tie the bandage around it according to the size of the wound, and take care that the wound is not restricted by the bandage; many fools have done this and caused their patients to die or suffer corrosion. The constriction should be looser and softer than for other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is large or deep and you doubt that harm might come to it as we have said, and you find pain in the area, then do not apply leeches; but wrap around it hard cloth instead, and tie it tightly.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days the swelling subsiding from the wound, then remove what you have placed over it entirely, and apply an ointment that heals wounds, such as an ointment of tetra-pharmacon and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you should loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is healed and cured.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And one must prepare the limbs in such a way that the bowstring runs smoothly downward.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they persist for many days, and it cannot heal but keeps dislocating the bowstring, know that there are small pieces of bone in there causing the pain. So you must probe the wound with a needle, and remove all those broken pieces that cause this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula or any other form of corruption develops, you should treat it according to what he said in the chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when a bone is broken and open on the limb, such as the thigh or shoulder bone, and similar large bones, do not treat it at all, for many die from it, but let it be until it knits; perhaps it will drop out after 20 or 30 days, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of bruises that come upon the healing
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Many times after the healing of a fracture, especially when it is near a joint, there is an ugly appearance to the limb; and often the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care then if the nose is swollen: use astringent medicines like aloes, incense, myrrh, sarcocolla, and similar others, grind them up and mix with wine or egg white or garlic; put it on the nostril as a poultice, hold it tightly in place for several days, then remove it and start again until the swelling is gone; or tie it with a well-fitting piece of plaster, for the property of the plaster is to draw out all swellings from the limbs; if the swelling has turned into hardness like stone, and needs to be removed, cut away the top and open up the excess; or have it cut by a surgeon so that it is removed, and then heal it.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	from the limb that is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is healed and the limb remains weak and frail, it happens for many reasons: one reason is that it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many ligatures, and the nourishment could not reach the limb; or due to excessive bleeding; or from too much movement, not at the right time; or because there is little blood in the body, and so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you feed the patient, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied in him; and the minister bathes him, and gives him joy and leisure; then put pitch on the limb, so that the pitch attracts the great swelling, and often wash it with tepid water, until the swelling goes down to the limb; and returns to its natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	then the limb becomes straight after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is crooked after healing, and the broken bone is open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function: therefore do not believe the foolish who say that one must break the limb completely anew; many fools have done this in our land, and these actions are blamed, and great harm results, and sometimes death; nevertheless, if the dislocations and torture are fresh, then they should be washed with hot water, or soft herbs should be cooked, such as leaves of comfrey, and roots, and mallow, and similar medicines that soften the swelling; and one makes .a softening ointment, such as well-prepared diaquilon, and one takes the mucilage of comfrey, and mixes it with tallow of cow's milk or oil of hempseed, and applies it to the affected area; or one takes fat figs, and grinds them with horse dung, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the dislocation is caused by constant rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And every hour, movement must be applied to the limb.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twistiness is awake and hardened, as in stone, and it is necessary to remove it with iron, then one must cut it up to the bone, with a subtle and light incision; and put cotton and study into the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, one should immediately reset it without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the area will swell and sometimes return to its place with pain; therefore, one must not move it at the hour when it is swollen: many times it brings on spasm and other pains; nevertheless, when this happens, let the patient be bled, then left alone until the abscesses are drained; then soak the limb in hot water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each member as the cure comes to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations from the head to the feet.
des mandibules	of the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Then the jaws are dislocated downward, and both dislocations have two types: they are slightly pulled out of place and slightly softened, or they are completely dislocated and hang down, with saliva dripping from the mouth that cannot be held closed, and the tongue is wrapped in speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it can be resolved with various treatments.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is complete and accomplished, then you must reset it quickly without tarrying; and in such a way that the minister grabs the head of the patient and stuffs one of his fingers into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other two fingers are spread apart to maintain equality; and instruct the patient to loosen his jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And she looks at it evenly, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the dislocation is stuck, especially when it's the two jaws together, then heat them with hot water and oil, until you reset them lightly; do not twist at all in resetting, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back into alignment and the mouth of the patient is closed well without softening, then place dampened cloths over it made from rose oil and wax, then tie it lightly with soft bindings; and let the patient sleep on his back, and let his head be between two pillows, so that he does not move it to either side, nor try to speak, but takes light food, until the pain is gone, and let the jaw be bound and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be reset within an hour, and are not converted to their places, then fever and usual sores come about, and perhaps stomach problems, and perhaps vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is deadly; and often the person it happens to dies within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The shoulder cannot be dislocated from the rib cage within its range of motion, nor from the foot; it is sometimes dislocated in a fall, and this is easily felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back and stretches out his arms; then press the dislocation firmly with your palm, and it will return; then place the ointment and bandage over it, and tie it tightly; and the shoulder joint which is towards the neck cannot be dislocated; if it does dislocate, and if it dislocates even once, then reset it to its place as we have said; then place the ointment and bandage over it, and tie it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed; and in the same way the shoulder joint is also reset when it has been dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	You should know that the shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: one is when it is dislocated at the part of the armpit below; and the second is at the part of the foot; and sometimes it is dislocated above, and this happens rarely; and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inside for the nerves; and often it dislocates beneath towards the armpit, especially in those who are thin, for in them it is more forceful; but in those who are stout, it dislocates gently, and goes back in gently.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men that there is a concussion or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	You must therefore test it until you are certain, and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And you will know that there is a dislocation when it is down towards the armpit, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them; and you will find in the head of the shoulder a pit, and under the armpit the head of the shoulder, just as if it were an eye; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move in any way; and also, if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you will clearly see it at the touch; and this kind of dislocation is not difficult to fix when it is new, or if the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is for the assistant to lift the affected hand upward, then place your fists underneath the shoulder, and forcefully lift the joint upward into its proper position; while the assistant lifts the hand and extends it upward, then lowers it back down; this should bring quick relief.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and they should be given softening and soothing poultices, such as a decoction of aniseed, fenugreek, and sweet lupine in water, and they should be applied. Then the patient should lie on their back, and place under the shoulder blade a pad of wool that is neither too soft nor too hard; then the minister places their heel on the pad and gently lifts the head of the shoulder, and draws the hand of the affected side downward; and another minister holds the head of the affected side so it does not move downward; in this way the shoulder will return at once. And you should have a man present who is larger than the patient; he should stand upright on the unaffected side, press his shoulder under the affected shoulder blade, and lift up the pad so that the patient hangs in the air; and another minister draws the hand of the affected side downward toward the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, they can add something heavy to them, and the dislocation will return immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And they reset it in another way: they also stick a long rod into the ground, so that the shoulder is as warm as a pistol, and neither too thick nor too thin; then it is placed under the patient, but with a cloth of wool on top, and the patient should be standing upright; then they extend their hand below to the other side directly, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it does not return due to all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a rod two yards long and four inches wide, which has a pointed tip to fit into the armpit, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then tie it to the top of the brand with soft cloth so that the brand does not hurt the patient, then place it under the joint of the patient; and extend the arm above the shoulder, and tie the shoulder to the brand, and the arm to the head of the hand, then place the arm on a wooden board, and extend the hand downward, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, in whatever way it is, you should then place a sphere of wool equal in size under the joint, then apply the prepared plaster with powdered millstone, incense and egg white, on the entire shoulder and around it, then tighten it under the joint gently, and tie the string over the plaster, and hug the hand to your chest, and let the hand remain like this.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And one should eat little, as long as the limbs are being healed, because they will heal faster; and then eat more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is stiff and not柔軟, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has moved out of its place due to moisture that it came into contact with, or for any other reason, then you must administer cauteries through three openings, as it is described in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates after 7 days, and the joint doesn't hold, and he cannot lift his arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be properly aligned.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocations that are towards the bottom, and in the breasts, or behind, are caused by pushing and stretching with the hands, and one should treat it until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing, there is cracking in the limb, and over time with movement, then the patient should use the bath many times until that cracking is relieved and returns to its original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	about dislocation of the neck
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You know that the joint of the neck is dislocated with pins, and it returns with pins; and if it is dislocated everywhere, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not reduced, for one sees and feels it well, and it is dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick neck with the healthy one, then you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	Because the joint is crooked, and he cannot bend his arm or touch his shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must reset it as soon as any abscess forms there, for if an abscess were to form there, it would be difficult to reset; and by chance it may not be able to be reset at all, especially when it is in the back; so it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and by chance death ensues.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it can be reset, that you extend his hand with your two hands; and let his arms be spread out, and his hands be bent according to the elbow, around, over, and under, and push the joint to his armpit together, or to the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in the front, it returns when he bends his hand to his hand and presses from the root of the palm to the elbow which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to go back into place, then strong extension is administered; and two ministers extend the arm, and two others hold it so that it does not move during the extension; then the arm is turned from each side, after which you have wrapped a long, wide cloth around it; and when the patient has joined the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil to smooth the joint, then push the joint firmly into place, until it returns; and when it is in place, apply a dry plaster with egg white, and hold it tightly, and bend the arm towards the sick neck, and leave it for several days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in place, loosen the binding and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not healing well, repeat the poultice and binding, and leave it for several days until it is firmly in place; then loosen it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels grevance after the joint is moved back into place and it still hurts, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is eased; or you put a poultice of fat mutton on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and have him enter the bath; and when he sweats, rub the joint gently, then replace the poultice, and enter the bath again; and do this twice or thrice until he is healed; and if you see, put warm wet cow dung on it with butter, and press it on; then it will return to its natural state.
li dislocation de la main	dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	When the dislocation of the hand is healed, and the return is gentle, more so than other joints, nevertheless, it must be put back into place gently, at the same time that it was dislocated, provided that the place is swollen or that a hot abscess has formed there.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And for the procedure, you put the patient's hand on a table, and extend their fingers, and look to put it back in place, so that they place their palm on the appearance of the joint, and press until it is restored; however, you must make sure that it is well placed; then have the patient place the back of their hand on a table for extension and movement.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then the patient should lie on his back with his hand on the table, and the surgeon should place his hand over that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it comes back into place now, then all is well. If not, then strain it with hot plasters to soothe the abscess and leave it like that without re-dislocating it.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back into place after several days, then the joint will remain crooked; and it will not harm the patient as long as his hand is numb, and he cannot grip anything at all: thus you will know that the nerves are cut, or the artery; and there is no other remedy except to cauterize below the joint, and by chance nothing else will help.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put on the plaster we have described, then straighten it and leave it for .v. days, then loosen it and leave it like that.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is any cracking, moisten it with warm water, and rub it until it heals.Et s’il advenist que li nerfs fuent copez, si ne puet movoir li membres, si le met sus l’emplaustre de la piere fendeit, et li frotte sus li nerfs tant qu’il soit sanez; car il ne peut sanz nerf.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the dislocation is in the fingers of the hand on either side, sometimes at the back of the palm or at the front; thus the finger is bent, and you pull at the joint to bring it back into place, then hold the top of the finger and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated; and leave it for two days, and then straighten it on that day; and every night you tie it, as we have said, and loosen it during the day, and make it move, and tie it up at night; and do this often, until it is healed; and do the same also if it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	from the dislocation of the neck
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the neck or neck is dislocated, there is no cure, for death comes quickly.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the eliminations are without control, and he cannot hold them in; and many times a limb becomes paralyzed, or one or both feet, or an arm; and often the shin changes color in four places; when it happens at the back it is called 'gilbositez'. The cure is to find out if the gilbositez occurred in childhood; there is no cure or healing for this.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of cure, great words, have not much benefit in all cases; but I have abridged them according to my intention, and have devised instruments in diverse ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the paralysis which comes to the front of the foot, there is no cure or healing; and likewise that which comes directly on both sides, and cannot be cured except by that which comes directly at the back, as I have said; and the patient must be stretched out on his face in one place evenly, and have a strap beneath him so that he does not blister; then fix a stake at the head in the ground, and another at the feet, and tie a cord under the joints of the sick part, and another at the hips, and knees, and ankles; and two ministers know the cords, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the stakes; and they are well fastened, the stake as we have said, and the minister puts his palms on the spine, until he recovers.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return through this treatment, take a board three yards long, and lie under the wall, and let the patient be on his side, and insert the end of the board under the wall; then place the middle of the board over the spine, and have the patient put his feet on the other end of the board, and press hard until it returns to its place. And if you see fit, do this while turning the body toward the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And you shall drive two pegs into the end of the patient's arm, and two others toward the feet, with about a palm's width between each pair of pegs; and in each peg there should be a hole, through which the strings pass, and the pegs should be firmly driven into the ground so they do not move. And between each pair of pegs there should be a turning post, around which the strings turn, and on the two turning posts there should be two small pegs, about a palm's length, for turning the body; then tie one string, which is among the pegs, to the turning post toward the head, and the other string toward the feet to the other turning post, and each of the assistants turns their turning post to all the strings, and the master puts the spine in place as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is healed, put on a desiccant poultice with an egg white, and then the compresses, and then the bandage of a tablet three fingers in length, which colors the area of the hunchback and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a ligature, as we have said, and use subtle cooling remedies on the patient until he is healed; and if anything comes to light at the end of the healing process, then one should administer softening and soothing medicines, along with the bandage that we mentioned earlier; and sometimes they apply a piece of plaster, and sometimes the appearance comes in the lower spine in the back, and they think it is dislocation; and it is the bone that protrudes, so one must not have any presumption about it: by chance it could bring about death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only become dislocated, and do not become so like the other joints; and the joint of the hip is healing according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and mostly inside, and a little healed in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy, it is longer, and the sick knee appears larger than the healthy one, and the sick one cannot bend their knee towards the fire; and the place which is nearby is swollen with a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes from within, is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him to whom it happens from the front, are that his leg is well according to their accomplishment; nevertheless, he does not double the knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot, and he retains his urine, and the veins swell, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him to whom it happens behind, are that he cannot extend his knee or bend it, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the veins are softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The remedies for this kind of dislocation are that you examine whether the dislocation is recent, and it remains according to its disposition, then there is no treatment; and it must not be allowed to become presumptuous.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for that which the dislocation is fresh, and it is of the four manners of dislocation, you hasten to return the joint, and stretch it within and without, and move it to the right and left; by chance it will return, and does not need any other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this way, you must prepare a strong minister, and stretch the leg strongly with two hands, or with a strap tied onto the knee; and another minister stretches his hand above in such a way that he pushes his hands under his heels, then he tightens a leather strap around the thigh; and another grips the head of the strap; and they all pull upwards and downwards at once, so that the sick person is lifted off the ground at once and remains stretched out.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to the four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, that is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, then one must apply a poultice to its appearance. When the dislocation is in the buttocks, one should apply the poultice on the healthy side of his back, then tie the bandage around the root of the thigh and the place under the armpit; then the bandage should extend upwards towards the armpit and the shoulder blade. Then have another assistant grab the patient's arms and hold the large part of the dislocated thigh, and stretch it outward; it will return to its place immediately. This method of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot bind it in the manner we have described, then one should tie both feet of the patient together with a strong leather band around the heels and knees; then let the dislocated leg be stretched out two spans more than the other. Then let him be hung from a pole, with his arms two spans above the ground. Then command an assistant to grab the head of the thigh and have another assistant hanging with the patient who grabs the thigh firmly; for the joint will return immediately.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is out of place, the patient lies down as we have said in the case of those who have a hunchback, and he pulls the ligament tightly on the affected leg, and also on the foot; then he puts two burning torches, one at the head and one at the feet, then he inserts the torch between the buttocks of the patient in the middle of the dislocation; and he applies wet bandages all around so that it does not burn the patient, then he extends each minister towards him, and the surgeon holds the dislocation equal to his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put him on the table and press him as we have said in the case of a hunchback, and let the patient lie on his side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is forward, one must extend the affected leg gently, and according to what I have said; and the assistant must put their weight on the painful shoulder, then press with the other hand, and stretch downward towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is out of place, then you should not extend the patient downward, nor lift him up, but he should be just as if his hip were dislocated out of place, as we have said in the case of lying on both hips; and let him lie on his face, and the ligament stretched as we have said before, and one must press upon the joint while he is on the table; and it will be correct when the patient extends his legs, and they are even; then adjust the buttocks, and apply the ointment, and tie it with a bandage, so that the hip does not move; and rest for 3 or 4 days, then loosen it, and apply the ointment again; and if you see that they are even, then tie it as before, and let him rest for 3 days; then loosen it, and let him walk comfortably until the limb is healed.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is, inside, outside, and behind; it is not dislocated in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the sign is that you command the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not straighten at the thigh, then you know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his face, and put his foot on your feet; then take his knee in your palms, and pull between your fingers, then bend both sides of the knee firmly; and another minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it straightens his leg at the thigh smoothly; and put the plaster on, and let the leg air at the thigh, and heal together strongly for three or four days, then loosen it; and the patient should not work at all, until the limb is healed.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not at all, then administer a strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes crushed, and sometimes fully dislocated, both inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it hurts in front of the part where it is dislocated; the movements are slight, and one must extend it slightly with his hands when it is only dislocated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is fully healed, you should make the patient stand upright, and grab the leg above the ankle; then pull the foot towards you with your right hand and then with your left two times, then stretch it up and flex it up high; and do this twice, as we have said, by bending and pulling on the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, then repeat the procedure, for it will return; and if it cannot return like this, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and push the passel firmly into the ground between his buttocks, and tie a cloth around it so that he does not move the patient; then grab the dislocated leg with one hand, and with the other extend the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is at a standstill, then put on the plaster and bandages, and stretch it firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the binding is not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the binding softens, then stretch it; then loosen it after a third or fourth day, and they should go about their business in four days; and if he goes before this time, it is not certain that he will not relapse.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if painful abscesses arise, you must calm them as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
des dois	of the armpit
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the arms are dislocated, they should be stretched without strain, and that is an easy matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any part of the foot, you should have the patient sit on a flat surface or table, completely upright, and place his foot on something that covers the joints, then press on the foot firmly until it is restored; and when it is even, and there is nothing sticking out, put a board under the sole of the foot with two holes in it, then stretch it firmly, and leave it for three days, then loosen it; and let him rest until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When dislocation comes with the wound, and you want to restore it, many times the patient dies: so do not be presumptuous in the treatment if you are not wise in the art or have not used it for long, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow to anger; start by using warm abscess-soothing things, and leave the patient in God's hand if you do not see hope of healing; but when you see hope, immediately put the limb back into its place so that the warm abscesses may come to it; and when the limb is in place, administer warm abscess-soothing things, and treat the wound as it should be with dry ointments; and if there is a fracture and broken bones, set the bones, and do what we have said about simple diseases; and beware of becoming fearful, as I have said, for this will harm you according to your Creator, and for the sake of your soul and your body.
Amen	Amen
