O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine along with its fulfillment, and I made the end through its expositions and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hands, namely surgery.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of the hands is neglected in our region and is foreign to all, the science has been lost and severed, and nothing remains of its force except for small descriptions in books by the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are closed off and science is kept at a distance.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	I think I want to animate it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition, declaration, and abbreviation.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	and will come together with the forms of cautery tools and other instruments of the work, along with the adjustment of their declaration and preparation as needed.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of the hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And one who undertakes this should excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as far as he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the moving and resting places of them, and where their channels originate.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And for this reason, Hypocras says that the name with the name is much, but with the work is little.
et meismement en l’art de main.	and especially in the art of the hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not aware of the things previously mentioned, should be careful that he does not fall into error and harm people;
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	so that I have often encountered many of those who meddle in this science and abandon themselves without knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I saw a foolish surgeon who lanced an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and he lanced the arteries in the neck;
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	because so much blood flows out that the woman dies between his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in a man's urinary tract; and the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	carried with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if they cut it out he would certainly die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And I saw another surgeon who treated the Duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was an injury;
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the ignorant surgeons pulled on the break above the wound so hard that they dislocated it, and did not leave any padding on the wound, and left him like this with an open wound;
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	and commanded that he should not reset it;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and he remained like this with his leg swollen and the foot, and he came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I was called to come to him, and hurried to come and reset the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I dislocated it, it was put at ease and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	However, the corruption had already settled in the limb, and he could not heal it;
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	and the corruption did not cease from spreading through the limb until all of the limb was destroyed.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another case where a doctor lanced an abscess that was swollen, and then it became inflamed due to the maliciousness of his lord.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	Because when a ulcer is free of melancholy humor, it must not be touched with iron unless in such a place that one can completely remove all that which is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And for this reason, very dear son, you need to know that the work of medicine is divided into two parts:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	that is, work where there is danger in many conditions;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	So it is necessary that you be careful, so that foolish people cannot speak badly of you.Car li savans ommes qui sont en art traittanz, por ses consillanz qu’ilz donnt, doivent être mesurs en chescun le
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	So take up your weapons in this way, and approach your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you will achieve salvation and be praised;
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and let the dreadful illnesses of deep sorrow
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	and set aside your arms from that which causes you to doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you may pass from this world into the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galen says in some of his warnings:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not take on a difficult disease unless you are called a foolish doctor.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapter is about fire cauteries and hot iron cauteries, and it covers the head down to the feet.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and includes the forms of instruments, and the tools for cautery, and all that is necessary for the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and includes leeches, wounds, extracting arrows, and similar things;
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and it covers the tools and their forms.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twisting, and similar things;
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	and it covers the head down to the feet, and includes the tools' forms.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus, as we remember the work, it is fitting that I say something about the nature of each temperament and their harmful effects.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of medicine, and understanding illness, are the most lengthy speech and subtle knowledge, and the secrets of remedies;
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	and of this spoke many of the sages, and agreed upon it;
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	and I am content with little of their words, for I fear length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that cautery aids universally in every complexion where it has matter, except in two complexions:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	that is to know hot complexion without matter, and dry complexion without matter.En la complexion chaude sens matiere, il n’a point de matere, si qu’il ne peuit cauterier:
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In hot and dry complexion with matter together, some people have spoken and said that cautery is of great aid;Car li feu s’en va sur la matere et le corps reste en repos;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	and others said the opposite:Car li feu s’en va sur la matiere et ne touche
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	Because fire goes into the matter and does not touch the body;And they say that cautery is worth nothing for illnesses that come from heat and dryness.Mais en la complexeion flege
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	But in the phlegmatic complexiona the nature of fire is hot, and should not be treated with heat for hot illnesses, nor for dryness;Et en la complexeion sanguine, car li feu ne se doit mie adrezier a la maladious qui vient de sang, car il est de nature cha
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	and those who say the contrary, that cautery does great good for hot and dry diseases that come upon men's bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the human body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found this to be true through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	Nevertheless, one should not employ it except for those who have experienced it and who know through long practice the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of men's complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and their outcomes and the season of the year.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	Of other complexions we have no fear, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the doctors agreed and concurred about the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my son, that cautery combines fire with the secrets of cures, and is of greater goodness than burning cautery of medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and it does not spread to any other part of the body apart from where it is applied, and it does no harm if properly used.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	Burning medicines move from one member to another, causing grief and poor healing in the member.
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	And by chance they may kill the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not do this unless there is an excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And that I have found through experience and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and been in the truth of things;
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	and because of this I excuse myself for the length of my speech, for I do not wish to take away from you the secret that is hidden in fire, and the nature of its work, how it drives out illnesses of the body, as the philosopher explains in his demonstration.
or le recevez en vos pensees.	receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on what time cauteries should be performed, and chose a favorable moment.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harmful humors are driven out by the help of cautery.
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And especially if the cautery is for painful and urgent conditions that cannot wait until a later time when greater harm might come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And never think, dear son, as fools do,
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	because the illness that is healed by cautery does not return;
et il le dient ensi;	and they say it thus:
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not as they believe; for cautery is only a medicine that moves the complexions and dries the humors which are the cause of the pain; it is worth more than other medicines because of its swiftness, its virtue, and its lordship.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And it is possible for a disease to come sometimes according to the complexion of the patient, and the location of the disease, and its virtue.
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	and the excesses are gathered in him through the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauterization is administered to where he has little excess and moisture, as with dental cauterizations for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return.
mais ce avient poc.	but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and that is evident;
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	but they do not believe that cauterization comes after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauterization is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in any disease and they do not work, then we turn to cauterization, and it does work.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is clear that cauteries are indeed the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancients said that cauteries made of gold instruments are better than those of iron, and they only said this because of the quality of gold and because of the height of its substance.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	and said that the heat of the cautery does not make blisters, but this is not true, for I have tested it and found that it is true in some people.
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	and gold cauteries are better than those of iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And yet, when you heat up a gold instrument, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down immediately;
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if it is heated too much,
si font au feu;	if they are heated in fire,
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	and so there are enough obstacles.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this, we use fire cautery which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Here I have arranged this chapter from the head to the feet so that the way is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of the olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and coldness on the head, and there are two types of disease caused by it, one called "soda", and by many humors which descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and also from many diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged with purifying medicine for three or four nights, depending on what the nature and age of the disease can tolerate;
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	And then have the patient's head examined.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then have him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on his knees;
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	Afterwards, place the palm of your hand between his eyebrows, between his two eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then bring your two middle fingers down, and let it bleed then heat the cautery called "olive", of which this is the shape:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And place it on the spot marked with ink, and move your hand up and down while squeezing it gently;
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	Then lift your hand slightly, and examine the spot if you see the bone under the skin;
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	And if you do not see it, reheat the cautery as I have instructed you until you see the bone;
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	Afterwards, take a piece of silk and place some soft cotton inside it and tie it up, and place it on the spot and leave it for three days;
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	after moistened with cotton in butter;
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and leave it until the burn is healed;
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	afterwards, treat the wound with an ointment called 'tetrafarmaçon' until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And they say that when the wound is left open for longer, it drains more effectively;
et por ce si aide mues.	and because of this, pus is expelled.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some say that one should let the cautery burn so much that part of the bone is burned, and then have what is burned of the bone resected and then cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And some say that one should leave the cautery on for so long, and press down so hard that it cuts through the bone as widely as the ring that women put on their fingers to draw out humours;
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and one must keep the wound open for a long time;
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	afterwards, one should treat and bandage it.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two methods of cautery do not seem good to me at all, except in some people where there is a fear;
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and I think I should let him go;
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	for the head is weakened by the continuous secretions of nature, as we witness in other members;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and likewise when the head is weakened by illness and the first appearance of cautery is gentler for me, I therefore work towards a joint salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When there is chronic pain throughout the head, lasting a long time, one should use herbs and pills for illness, and purgatives for the head, as well as oils and plasters;
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	and if one performs the cautery that we mentioned earlier and it does not help,
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take care that the head of the ill person is not of a hot nature, and that it is not too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	then cauterize him under that cautery which we mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	After that, do cauterization on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and do cauterization in the place which is called "vessels".
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and there are places where one puts leeches;
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and lighten your hand so that you do not go up to the bone:
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere;
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	and the cauteries on the horns should be thinner than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and that is the form;Aprés ke li cauteres soit fitz sus les cornes,
dou cautere dou chief	of the cautery of the head:
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	After that, when sudden pain arises in a part of the head, and the disease is spread to the eye, and the shoulder is purged by purifying medicines, and all the other remedies I have described in the division of diseases, and none of them help:
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	then make cauteries according to two methods, namely of medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	The cautery of medicine is that you take a piece of alder, remove the bark and wrap it around both shoulders, and then make the sign of the cross on the skin where the pain is, in such a way that you can place the piece of alder underneath the skin.
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	And when it is placed, tie it and hold it tightly and leave it for twelve hours.
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	Then untie it and pull it away from the alder, and leave the wound like that for two or three days;
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	Then place a long piece of cotton soaked in butter over the wound until it heals.IIe cautere de feir est que tu prendes une fumee de chanvre, et le fent bruleer
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	The cautery of fire is that you take hemp smoke and burn itAfter the wound has healed, treat the scar with ointment until it is gone.and then the patient should
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	and if you see fit to use some of the burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth treatise on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery is done in this way.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery tool until it is the right temperature.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called a "cleft" because the head is formed in the shape of a cleft or pit, and in the middle has a small protrusion;
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and place it over the painful area, and hold your hand and gently turn the fire a little bit, so that half of the thickness of the skin is burned;
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	and quickly take your hand away so that the artery does not burn and flow profusely with blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	Afterwards, put cotton wool soaked in vinegar on it, and keep it there for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	then apply wet cotton wool with butter, and then heal the area with ointment until it is healed;
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	and if you wish to cauterize this hemorrhoid with the cautery called "culterium", do so at the very tip only, and be careful not to touch the artery in this hemorrhoid which is not old.
de emigraine	of hematoma
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat a migraine as we have previously described in the sections on diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cautery previously mentioned in the medicine section and the fire do not help, then you must heat the cautery tool called "cultellare" until it turns white.
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	And you sign the area over the vein with a line of about half an inch in length, and move your hand away once, and press it so that you do not cover the artery and go all the way to the bone.
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	And beware of the jaw that mutes when one chews, and the nerve should not be affected so that there is no muteness or spasm in the patient, and beware of blood flow from the artery when it is cut, for this can cause great fear both to the unskilled and inexperienced person.
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and leave the work halfway done;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it opens in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the disease and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals.
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	And if you see that he needs the cautery we mentioned in the chapter on extraction of the artery, with the cautery tool that has two knives;
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	and this cautery is better and more effective than the other one.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	from pain in the ears due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is pain in the ear from cold, and one has applied dissolving medicines and other treatments that we have described in the division, and the pain does not go away, then heat this cautery, which is called a «point», with which there is a needle at its end:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After you have marked the area around the ear where the pain is located in both ears, or in one if it is only there, and then move slightly up from the root of the ear, where you will make the incision;
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	and has six points around each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	after treating the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	Wounds that must be treated with cautery are only those that cause pus, as we have said in the sections on diseases;
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not use cautery on sores that come from dryness and nerve pain.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you treat this type of wound that discharges fluid from the ears and nose, and cleaning the head and gargling do not help, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries:
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	one at the root of the ear, another a little above the temple, and the third in the junction between the two lips;
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	and place the cautery in the part that appears healthy, and cauterize above the head of the ear, a little below the horn of the head, and another one on the temple as long as a finger;
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	and leave the cautery on until the middle of the heart is burned;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And the appearance of the tweezers that we have put before, but it is a bit more subtle and the tweezers should be a bit thicker;
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	after cleaning the area as I have said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When apoplexy is old and you treat it thus as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient has a fever, then make 4 cauteries:
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	2 on the 2 horns of the head, and 1 in the middle of the head, and 1 in the place called "vessel", as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach;
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	and treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	of litharge
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this disease, give the patient large pills that cleanse the brain.
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	After washing the head of the patient thoroughly, place a mustard plaster described in the chapter on plasters upon his forehead.
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	And this is how to do the cautery:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	if he does it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If he is healed like this, it is good.Si li peilz sont lons et igals, et s’il ne le point
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	And if the hairs are long and even, and if he does not feel any pricking, make three cauteries on his head, going from above to below, and space them two fingers apart.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	And treat it as the others, and if you see any swelling, and the patient can endure it, make a cautery in the middle.et s’il ne le peut demorer ains qu’il se mueve ou se desaluit, tu le remets a leu; et se li estraint les eulz, li fai III
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if necessary, two others on the two horns, and cure it until it is healed;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	and use the cautery called "olive", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of cold from the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	The head should be cleansed of hair and of what we mentioned earlier;
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	after resetting the dislocated head, then cauterize in the head and on each horn, and once behind and three times on the spine of the neck;
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is severe, then do three cauteries on the spine of the back;et si tu veiles le fere sanz douleur et sanz grant lesion, covient que li cauteres soit ben fitz et frids.
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	and leave it until the most sensitive part is burned and lift your hand;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	then cure it until it is healed, and use the cautery called "olive" as we mentioned earlier.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first cleanse the brain of hair and other remedies that we have mentioned in the division when the disease is great and suffering from taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is a child who cannot bear it, make him gargle and chew, purifying the brain often with good meat;
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	after the king comes the head in the middle, and do the cautery according to what we have said before, and the cautery on the vessel, and on each horn;
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and if the disease is external and bearable, do cauteries as I have said for someone with paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cautery be olive according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the disease is in an infant, make a small cautery according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When through the cause of melancholy there are corrupted humours and thick phlegm, then cauterize with mild cauteries as we have said for paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if through the cause of melancholy the humours are inclined towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink that will cleanse the brain, according to what is said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After the king comes the head of the disease;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	Then make a well-made linen bandage, like a circle, and place it on the head;
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	and let the disease be crossed, and be well held from all sides;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	Then offer the linen, and put on a poultice of old goat's butter;
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	and the hot cautery temperately, so that he can bear it;
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	after emptying the ring from within the head, and leaving it to cool;
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and do this to the patient once a week with other good treatment, until he is healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or, if you wish to cauterize the eye, make several small points on the entire cautery tool.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This cautery method moistens the brain greatly;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	and then put wet cotton in mutton tallow and grease of goose.
de l’awe des eulz	of their eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When awfulness first comes to the eyes through the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient drink that cleanses the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make him sweat in a bath several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	Afterwards he has his head shaved and cauterized in the head, and he does two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the eye is to both eyes together, or one if it is to one;
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	and cover all the veins and arteries that are under the skin, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple;
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	and beware of bleeding, and if you see too much blood issuing, stop it as best you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and the incision, the cautery how you should apply it;
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	and sometimes a cautery or hatchet is made under the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	where the body weeps
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears are old and habitual and on top of the veins, or alongside the arteries that are visible on the outside of the head;
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and it can be seen that they are cold phlegmatic superfluities, then he should make the cautery which I described earlier, descending towards the eyes:
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I cautery on the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or hatchets under the two bones;
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	and if there is more need, then he should cauterize bleeding above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	from the body through the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you treat him according to what we have described in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three nights of cow's milk;
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	after the king, the head, and the cautery with olive oil.
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	and make the cauteries called "clavicles" over the two joints, a little under the hair.
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	and be careful of the artery that you do not cover it up.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the film of the eye becomes soft due to illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery tool called "olive".Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste maniere.
de coi ci est li forme:	The fire cautery is done in this way.
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see to make two cauteries over the two joints as long as the joints are;
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and do not leave the hand there except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to what I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	Sometimes the hair in the armpits turns inward and pricks the underarm, and cauteries are done according to two methods; one is:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	that is, with fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	The fire cautery instructs the patient to let the hair grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they grow long and even, then put the cautery to the patient's skin.
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	Afterwards, draw on paper a figure that is also like the hollow of the myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be between the hairs.
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then place cotton soaked in egg white and sweet alyssum musk on the eye; then heat the cautery with which this figure is formed.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	Afterwards, cauterize over the figure that you have drawn a little bit at a time many times so that the heat burns the area.
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	And the sign of the treatment's success is when you see the skin raised and the hairs standing upright at the edge of the eye.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	then loosen your hand, and let it be for three days, then place wet cotton in the buttocks until the scald is healed.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the wound has healed, treat it with ointment until it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if afterwards the hairs grow, and the skin becomes soft, then restart the cautery on the same spot, just as you did before;
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	and if the hairs fall out, then cauterize it until the skin returns to its natural state, and is even, and the hairs do not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf;
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	then take French soap and live charcoal, of each one-third, and grind them well together;
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	and make it quickly so that it does not cool, then spread over the shape you have made like a myrtle leaf, and place some on the paper;
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	and if the disease is in one eye only, then one must treat that one, and if in both, then both;
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and place under the eye moist cotton soaked in egg white;
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	and let the head of the patient be in a healthy position and place your hand showing the medicine, and press it hard and move it all the time that the patient feels biting from the medicine, for he will feel biting as from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your body.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the biting has passed, lift up the eyelid, and look to see if the paper is also lifted up as it was by the constraint of fire or by incision;
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	and if so, then all is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If not, then continue with the medication on the area until the work is equalized and the eyes are put in place.
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put wet cotton on the burns until they heal, and then treat the area of the ointment that is called "diaper" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to be careful with your work, so that it does not break the medicine on them.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes soft afterward, and the hair pricks in the eye, then continue the medication on that area which is softened by the paper properly, just as you did before;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it until it is healed;
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and this is the shape of the bellows:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And know that men's eyes are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this, the constraints should be;
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and the right way is not revealed to those who have dedicated themselves to this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	on the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you are treating a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then you must perform cautery on it according to this manner. Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to put his head in your lap.
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and hold his head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or drop.
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	After that, place wet cotton in the white of an egg or in juice of parsley on his eye;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	afterwards heat the cautery which is made thus:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and shaped like a quill pen on one end, and on the other end is the cautery;
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	if you want it pointed at both ends, or if you want it also shaped like a tent;
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	but that which is shaped like a quill pen is better for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	Afterwards press the fistula if it is open and draw out the pus and dry it;
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	and if it is closed, then open it and draw out the fluid;
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	Afterward, put on the hot cautery, and hold your hand to the cautery at the part under the eye, so that your hand does not make foolishness.
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery right up to the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If not, then renew the cautery again once more, and if you need another one, leave it for three days;
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	Afterward, put on wet cotton in butter, and let it be cured by the dry ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, then use corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered;
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and treat it according to how it comes in his eye.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula which some of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Pay attention to a fistula, and probe the site;
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Afterward, put in the slit one small needle so that it is at the base:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and make it the size of an egg;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and hold your hand over the cautery firmly, and do not move the patient until the plaster has set;
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and you should put wet cotton on the patient's eye, soaked in vinegar or wine:
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	the plaster will heal the fistula miraculously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization that we have described, then it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, one must administer an incision to the nail, and bring the fistula back into the body of the nail according to what is appropriate in its own place.And if the cauterization does not heal the fistula, then you should make an incision on the nail, and bring the fistula back into the body of the nail according to where it belongs.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there are cracks in the lips which are called "hairs," and especially so in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have described above in sections, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small blade-like cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And it will gradually heal those fissures until they are closed;
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess forms at the root of the gum, or in the uvula, or palate, or tooth roots, and there is swelling and pus and it becomes a fistula:
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	and you treat it as we have described in the section on incisions, but it does not help:
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	then you must have the cautery according to the size of the fistula.
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	after the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand steady so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and then go around it from behind.
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this once or twice after the treatment we have described for fistulas, until it is healed.
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if it is treated thus, that is good.
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if not, then you must expose the area and remove the rotten bone, according to what you find in his shoulder.
dou movement des dens	the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it doesn't help, then put the head of the patient in your lap.
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	after heating the cautery whose shape will be described below, you apply it to the tooth by placing a piece of cotton on it.
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and place the hot cautery gently within, and hold your hand steady so that the patient feels the heat reach the root of the tooth;
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	then remove your hand and repeat with the cautery as desired.
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	afterwards, fill the patient's mouth with salt water and let it sit for an hour and release the forces.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner, the tooth that was loose is now firmly fixed, and the gums are softened and restrained, and the putrid moisture is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of toothache
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When tooth pain comes from coldness, or there is coldness or whiteness, and the remedies of medicine are ineffective, then cautery is needed in two ways:Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and cautery with butter and fire cautery.For fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	Butter cautery: take butter from a cow, and its end in a spoon made of iron or bronze;Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des sai
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	take cotton and wrap it around the end of a tent-peg, soak it in buttock's milk, and apply it to the aching tooth until it is relieved.
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	and do this often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. And if you see it moistened wool and cotton in cold buttock's milk, and put on the aching tooth, and put on the hot iron until the fire comes to the gum of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The fire cautery together is such that you take an iron or bronze rod, and let it be thick so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	Afterwards heat the cautery, of which the shape will come later, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, for the pain will be removed that day or the next day.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And the patient must fill his mouth with good butter quickly before this cautery, and then let it cool down.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And this is how to make the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And take any part of the body you want, according to what you are able;
et c’est li forme de la caine:	And this is how to make the cauterizing iron:
des scrophules	of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When scrofula is cold and moist, and not subject to digestion by medicine, then heat the cauterizing iron so that it becomes very hot, and let the smoke come out of the iron from one side to the other;
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	And place the hot cauterizing iron on the abscess once, or as many times as necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess;
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	And if the abscess is small, apply the cauterizing iron according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days.
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	and apply moist cotton to the burn until the scald is removed;
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	thereafter, treat the site with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When moisture prevails over the channels of the lungs, and particularly when it comes from a cold constitution, then the patient should first be purged with medicine that dissolves.
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	After that, he should have cautery at the root of his throat; and be careful not to go any higher than the throat, but only burn a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After that, he should have another cautery at the junction of neck and head, at the top of the spine, and it should be a cautery called 'clavicle' as we have described earlier;
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat the site as we have said before until it is healed.Appré le fai I cautere sus la jointure de leus coudies, et apret les teneures qui li
de la toust	of the tongue
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all diseases of the chest are from cold moistors, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and is an old disease if he .II cauteries on the breast in their homes;
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and another cautery between the breasts between II;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	and is the cautery which is called "clavicle" according to the form which has already been said.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see, make cautery with piercing all the cautery which is called "points" of whom the form is before in the disease of the ears;
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	and let the points be to XXX, or around.Et soit l’espas de li poins XX a la cote selonc la granture del mal;
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After healing the wound according to what is said above, and let the cautery be performed three times according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And therefore are cauteries easier to do, because you make them .iiij. times.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	After that, anoint the patient on his back and sides;Et si tu vois que li malaide s’esvaigne et ne revien por le cautere, et qu’
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	And if you see that the illness is relieved and does not return due to the cautery, then gently lift the scrotum with the fingers of your left hand;et qu’il teneit ains lieve li testikels sel
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is dislocated within, heat the cautery which has two prongs like a needle here is the shape:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and cauterize the skin until it pierces all the way through, and you will feel the heat of the cautery with three cauteries;
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	and for this cautery is made with a cautery which has three prongs, so that there are six cauterizations;
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and the nerve is like the subtlety of a tent and this is the shape of the cautery which has three prongs:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is placed upon this one nerve, because there are eight cauteries on it.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	Afterwards, put on the cautery with crushed pepper with honey;
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Afterwards, let the patient rest and do not move the limb for a long time until he is fully healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, then little will happen; therefore, perform the cautery on the thick part of the cautery needle, or a lot of cauteries by pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture enter the stomach and draw it out of its natural state, and when there are many cathartics in him, and he is not helped by usual remedies and treatments, then the patient should be made to lie on his back and extend his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	Then afterwards, make three cauteries one below the heel of the foot by the amount of a bean, all around the clavicle, and two cauteries on either side so that the shape of the cauterizations is triangular, and there is an equal distance between them so that they are not joined together when they grow pus;
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	and let the cautery be so deep that it pierces both parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauteries follow this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you wish to cauterize a large cautery within the stomach according to this form:
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	and whoever is afraid of this cautery, cauterize a small point and sign on the stomach according to the amount you wish to cauterize:
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	then cauterize with all the cautery that is called "points.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the disease that we have mentioned earlier, until it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When the liver hurts from cold and moisture and from excessive flatulence as it has been moved from its natural complexional position:
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the disease is cured by what we have said in divisions, and if it does not help, then the patient should be bled from his finger;
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and sign within three cauteries according to this form and shape and quantity on the liver, avoiding the hypogastric region where the gut of man comes from;
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	and there should be the thickness of a thumb between each cautery;
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	and the cauteries should be held gently and not pressed too hard on the body;
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	and let half of the cautery burn, and let the patient lie straight on his back with his feet elevated;
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	and if he cannot, then let him lie down, and stretch out his legs and raise his hips;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the procedure:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if you wish to cauterize with the steel, be skillful and wise in the art, and beware of burning the entire body, for you would cause the whole body to dry up.
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And let it come just to a boil, for the skin is very delicate in that place, and you can tell by looking.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	if he is in a cart, let the patient feel pain not too strongly;
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	and if he is on the ground, then let him feel acute pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And then when this treatment has been applied to the ulcers, the patient should be laid down with his head elevated;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	and then sign with oil on the site of the abscess, and then heat the cautery which is shaped like a rod, by which the form [of the cautery] is made:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And cauterize with the cautery until the ulcer is burned, and go down to the bone, until all of the pustules are gone;
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the treatment according to the treatment with bandages until it is healed;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	and no one should use this cautery except for those who have studied the art of medicine for a long time, and through whom these diseases have sometimes deteriorated.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore he can work boldly, and in any case I think it is better to let him do so.
dou cautere de pleuresin	with the cautery of phlegmon
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancients said that one must do cautery to a ulcer with roots of aristolochia, and in such a way:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	take a root of aristolochia that is long, the largest you can find, and dry, and as thick and as long as your finger;
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	and moisten it in oil, and burn it on a cautery between the throat and neck, and two smaller cauteries slightly lower down on the part which is underneath the beard;
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	and two cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, declining slightly backwards;
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	and one cautery in the armpit, and one over the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two as you go down from the armpit away from the cautery that is between the shoulders;
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	and do not press your hand at all, but do it smoothly as when applying perfume.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And some ancients said that someone should use a fire cautery like a razor, heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches that abscess.
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	and jump to avoid the pain, as we have said about the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this procedure there is fear of death for the patient, or a fistula occurs that cannot be healed.And some say that if one uses an iron cautery like a razor and cauterizes between the ribs, it will reach the heart; and sometimes pus flows out and the patient recovers, as we have seen happen.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the illness of the moon as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not help at all, then they rely on three methods of cautery which are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	Of these, one method is to make three cauteries, or four, by lining up according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cautery which we mentioned earlier;
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient be careful on his back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	and another way to cauterize is to heat the cautery which has two prongs, as we have shown in the shoulder dislocation;
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and gently lift the skin where the mouse is, or the side of the patient's body from which the arrow came towards the left, and let the elevation be according to the skin, according to the length of the body, and the cautery according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After I tie the two nerves inflamed so that the heart is pierced from the other side, and then I draw out the cautery, and thus there will be four.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see, cauterize with all the cautery on three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the scrofula has been cured for a long time, it is better than any of the other remedies mentioned above.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery is no good for an idropic, except in the manner that is called "asclytes.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you cure it according to the methods we have described in parts, and your treatment does not help, then you should do four cauterizations around the armpit, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the breast, two behind the back on the spine, and one on the buttock;
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and let the cautery be close to the spine of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	Afterwards, leave the cautery open for a long time, and do not stop the treatment of the malady after the cautery;
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	and healing will hasten, and the two intentions will come together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The form of the cautery for the belly is the clave that we have shown before;
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	and those for the back are olive-shaped, as shown earlier.
de l’enfleure des piez	of swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical and filled with yellow water, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger;
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	and move your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	Nor enter too deeply, as they say against the yellow awl, and let the cautery be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	After that, make two cauteries on each leg, at the tip of the tibia;
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other above, in the middle of the leg;
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	and leave the cauteries untouched for a long time without healing, until the water comes out;
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	after that, do the other cauteries that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When a person has abdominal distension caused by coldness and moisture, and the retaining and digestive functions of the stomach and intestines are impaired and cannot be healed through other means of treatment;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	and you see the patient suffering greatly and with great virtue, then make the large cautery on the stomach according to what he has spoken of before about the cautery of the stomach, make the cautery circular;
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	and 4 cauteries around the body subtly throughout all the cauterization ключ, and 2 cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundance of moisture and the patient suffering, then make cauteries on the elbow, and one cautery on each shoulder, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good support.
de la cure des emorroydes	on the treatment of hemorrhoids:
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When hemorrhoids are in the rectum, one or more, and they are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and are treated as we have said with division, but it does not help, then make cauteries:
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	3 on the spine of the back, that which is entirely under the armpit, poke and poke little by little in a triangle shape, and 2 cauteries under the body on both sides;
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	and if you think his stomach is cooled and the meat does not cook, and one sees swelling in the face, then make the large cautery on the stomach as it is said before, and another on the liver, and another on the heart throughout all the cauterization ключ;
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	and let the cautery remain uncovered for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After curing the area until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you apply to the ulcer, heat the cautery until it is like a razor, and then place it firmly on the ulcer;
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and hold your hand steady so that the cautery comes to the base of the vein, causing the blood to clot;
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of ulceration, cauterize each one as we have described;
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	after treating the ulcers, apply healing ointments until they are healed;
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	and if you cauterize with a large cautery on an abscess, it will bring more relief.
de plaie mal curee	of a badly cured wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will discuss in its place, such an illness comes that it cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a fistula occurs, and there is suppuration and a discharge of rotten moisture, you should examine it thoroughly with a thin needle, and be mindful to probe as deep as the tent goes.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After heating the cautery until it is like a razor, insert it into the fistula according to how deep the wound is, and then reheat the cautery as needed until the affected flesh is burnt, once, or twice or thrice, depending on the amount of tissue involved;
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	and beware of burning the nerves which are within it, and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	if the fistulas go to the bladder and intestines, beware of those places, and do not make fires too hot, and think that they are not dead;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	afterward cleanse the place until it is healed, and if the wound is sore and the matter has been discharged for a long time, then know that the wound is completely healed;
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	and if the matter is not discharged, know that the wound is piercing and corrupting the bone at its depth;
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	and thus with one of those we will mention in their place.
de la maladie des reins	of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When cold pain comes with wind and does not take the woman's desire, then you must make a cautery on both sides of the back with the hot iron we mentioned earlier;
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	and if we cauterize it with milk, it will have three cauteries in a line, and they will be of greater help.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then he should be cauterized in the part above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic hairline begin, on the right and on the left, and each cautery should be as long as a thumb;
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	and he is cauterized on the back, where there are two cauteries if you need them;
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	and the cauteries are claved according to the form previously mentioned.
de la marris	of the bones
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the womb is cold and moist, and does not leave one hopeful of conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms delayed;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they come, they feel great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	then you must make three cauteries around the wound, as we have said in the cautery for the bladder, and two cauteries on the back;
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and let the cautery be performed with a key, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When the viscous moisture descends into the box of the hip and because of this it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and if the dislocation is found in the hip joint, then you must cauterize the patient on the hip joint with a cautery resembling a circle, and sign before the place around the joint as it turns, so that the joint is within the circle;
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	and let the cautery be performed like those by which one cauterizes the stomach.Quant la boiste de la hainche est disalote, si covient que tu disloques les cuisses,
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if this cautery is not present, then make three great olive cauteries, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the warts.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and cure it until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of hip pain
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes in the hip socket, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient has been treated as we have said in the division and the treatment does not help, and the illness is old:
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	then you must purge the patient of the gross humors with smelly pills, or other good-smelling pills alike.
Aprés li fai cautere;	After that, make a cautery;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	and the way of making the cautery is according to two methods:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	that is to say, together with burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cautery has many methods, one of which is as follows:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	that you cauterize upon the bone of the hip three cauteries triangularly according to this form, and make them deep and large, and let there be between each cautery a space the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be olivary;
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	sometimes one cautery is made in the middle upon the head of the hip, according to this form: there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you wish, cauterize with the circular cautery which we mentioned earlier in the dislocation of the hip;
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	but do it in such a way that the circles contain the whole hip, and all the thickness of the flesh is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the method done in sciatica, when the pain stays in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it comes to the thigh and leg, make two cauteries where the patient says the pain is, and one cautery above the ankle, four fingers, on the left side a little;
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	and let the cautery be with a hot iron, and burn the thickness of the skin;
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	and if the pain extends to the sole of the foot or near it, then he should be cauterized where he feels the pain for three or four points with the cautery called 'points'.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if necessary, have him cauterized more;
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	and if he feels that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then have him cauterized with a hot iron or circular cautery; and be very careful in all your cauterizations not to leave the iron on so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause greater harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who had cautery done on the ankle of the foot, and they left it until the leg was all swollen, and the foot as well, and it was pierced and corrupted all through the foot.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a stomach ache from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two places together, do cautery in one and the other according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And for the cautery of the hip, from which there is this method, make an iron as thick at the tip as a thumb, or a little less, and pierce it with holes in between so that the distance between them is the thickness of a thumb joint;
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	and have the hinges of two parts, and also like nuts, and let there be one handle of well-made iron;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And it should be heated until it is bright red and dripping with fat, and then placed on the box of the sick hip, and turned onto the healthy side;
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and the cautery is used once, and left for three days;
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	and then make an ointment of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time;
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasim says that we use this cautery sparingly because of its appearance, and we see few who use it;
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	and yet it is a good cautery, which can be endured by those to whom it is applied.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The cautery of medicine burns when you make the instrument to cross between in such a way that the rim of the door descends, and it is made of brass or iron with one side long, and in its height there are two inches, and between each there is the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and they are open beneath and above, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	After placing the box of the hip on the patient lying on his sound side, and then press your hand strongly on the box of the hip.
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After that pour between the two circles of the hot iron which has been heated in the fire for a little while, and let the patient endure the heat and burning of it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For he will experience biting just as from fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	and when the biting is passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip gently, and let it be so for three days, and apply butter as long as that which is black from the burning is removed.
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and let him for three days until the pus drains out;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and this would be the final treatment after the dressing of wounds until it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make the instrument that colors like salt according to what you did in the hip joint;
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	and this is how the hot color is made, and I have written it in the treatise on the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, as much of each, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	where there is a small hole so that the point of a pin can enter;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and put on top of this another well-plumbed pot, and put on top of it an alkali and heat and a gentle color on top, until there are two fingers of powder above the colors which you will have well mixed with your hand;
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and let it be thus until the water and pieces fall into the plumbed pot, then take all that color and pour it over heat and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And then there will be much fever, which is administered through various medical procedures and cauteries on other limbs.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	Because it does the same harm as fire, and there are other remedies with which one can cauterize the hip, such as thistle honey and anardana fruit mixed with soap.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen relates a cure where a man was cured of hip and sciatic pain, and he praised it highly, saying that no other treatment was used, and that the man was healed in a single instance after this cure was performed, and he bathed as instructed below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And he said in such a way that you apply the litarge powder green and dry, and grind it very finely with a little fat, and place it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is, and bandage it;
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	and leave it for three hours, and according to the intensity of the disease, not feeling the burn anymore.Et puis tu destrouves le cautere et la lie, et mets autre cautere soubs, et dist a li sain
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then he makes him enter the bath until his body is a little warmed up, and he makes him enter the bed, and the pain will go away completely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such medicines after a bloodletting.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's dung, it helps a lot;Et quant li poignet de la hainche est desaloiee et se met le pie soubs li corps, si covient que tu la remettes sus li pie, et si covient
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and the cautery must be performed in such a way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take lamb's wool and grease it with old oil, and place it on the hollow between the big toe of the foot and the other one called the little toe.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	Take dry goat's dung, place it in fire until it becomes charcoal, then put it on wool and leave it until it turns to ash.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	Do this again and again, until you feel it reach the hip and the pain ceases.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	This method of cauterization is called "goat's dung cautery.
de la dolor dou dos	of back pain
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes in the back, whether from sitting or from impact or from excessive discharge, or from similar appearances of expanded cold matter, none of these indications are suitable for cauterization except for that which comes from the diffusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	After the patient has been purged of foul humors with fetid pills or similar remedies, draw three lines on their back where the pain is located, and make V cauteries in each line according to the strength and amount that the patient can endure.
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	The cauteries should be performed using the instrument called a "poke." et li cauteriste doit estre presté de sa main, et li poins doit estre embrezés de l’oil ou
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	and if you see, make three cauteries or four using the key-shaped cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	This disease often affects young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a tight armpit when they wake up, and fear;
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	and you will find it in the last spine of the back, and the appearance that comes above the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you cure it, then cauterize it with the cautery of salt according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the purple cautery equally affects every part of the spine.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery tool 2 or 3 lines apart, and have the points close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	Afterwards, heal the area according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply cautery on any area that is swollen and in a state of inflammation which may be affecting nerves.
de la dolor des jointes	There are two types of cautery: one is by fire and the other is by salt. The salt cautery is better; it does not burn the flesh or the bone or the nerve, but is a great remedy for pains that come from the head.
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When joint pain is from moistors that are expanded in every member of the body, and when it comes to feet, which the doctor properly calls "podagra," and when it is from a cold cause and does not heal with medicine, then it is healed by cautery in such a way:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	make the mouth of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary to prick the sole of the foot, then use the entire cautery tool on the «point.»
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, which often happens, if you make cautery on each knee three or four times in each part, all over the olive-shaped cautery;
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	and if you need to do more, then do it, but don't hold your hand against the skin any longer than necessary so that the heat doesn't scorch.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and the back, administer the cautery we mentioned in his chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if there is pain in the hands, make a point around the finger joint two lines away from it;
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	and if there is no pain in the fingers, then make a point on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	and if the pain comes from the wrists or up to the shoulders, then cauterize each part and treat the patient well and take medicine.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give him good treatment and purge phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rot of the sinus
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When diarrhea comes from anger, and the bowels descend to the testes and this is new, then when you see it being treated, it shouldn't be done that day;
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and let him eat things that loosen the belly so that the feces descend from his belly;
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	after you make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to tense his belly so that the navel is pulled in, and bring your fingers to your hips, and sign from under the waist onto the bone of the wrist, and throughout a sign that resembles half a circle above the body;
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then heat up the cautery with which this form is made:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it is white and exudes pus.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then reset the bowels to their place;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and the assistant holds his hand so that it does not return;
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	and well open the thighs for the patient, and put under him a pillow and a servant on the thighs, and another on the feet who holds his hands;
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	then put the cautery on the sign all around your hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, do it again until you reach the bone;
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and carefully guard against the boil erupting when you perform the cautery;
que tu ne le brulasses;	so that you do not burn yourself;
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and so that the patient does not die, or suffer some other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size, and for larger people also large according to their size;
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	after 3 days treat the site of the cautery with butter until the scorch is healed;
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	after that treat it with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days so that the wound can close properly;
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	and it is necessary to keep his bandages on for a long time so that the boil does not emerge when he tries to move around.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after 40 days, when he wants to stand up, let him use a well-made crutch, and use it for another 40 days;
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	and has good rest, works little and guards against too much drinking and eating, and against speaking too loudly;
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	and when he follows this advice, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say hereafter about the treatment of cutting on his head.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture in the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When ulcers come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they are not growing any more, then do the cautery with the fire according to its quantity, and burn the third of the skin;
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	after the cauterization according to what we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	and some of the ancients say that one should cauterize it with a three-pointed cautery according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the place of entrance and make a line across the width above the ulcer, and another across it, and hold your hand in the middle of all the cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and gentler.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any limb, from falling or being struck, and that pain lasts a long time, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "point", and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its torture and its location.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	if he is healed by the first cauterization, that is good;sinon, tu le remets ou il est, et te reprouves de tout ce que tu
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	if not, you reset it where it was and try everything in that name again, and do another cauterization on the one near which it is, because such is the custom that it should move to the nearest limb, so you must do the cauterizations until the patient is healed.et si li cauteres ne se peuit faire en celui leu, ne plus le remets, car il ne se doit demourer en celui membre;
de meselerie	of miasma
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	Sometimes ulcers are helped by cautery with great relief, especially those diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	Now when you see it cauterized, take heed if the disease is in its early stages, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not disappear or remain, and you doubt that the corruption will spread throughout the disease, then make V cauteries on the head:
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	I burn the scalp nine times, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hairline;
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and two on each horn, and one behind on the nape of the neck;
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and leave your hand so that the cautery reaches the bone, and as much so that the scorches come out so that the vapors of the thick humors can come out;Apres qu’il a l’escorce et la chair secce sus le chief com je vos ai dit, metez une fife de lin en l’escorce qui est plus pross de la fin des chevous.
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	After the scorch and dry skin appear on the head as I have told you, put a piece of linen in the scorch that is closest to the end of the hairline. And
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the hair is scattered all over;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and she is losing hair obviously, then you should cauterize her scalp with the cauteries that we have described above, and one cautery on the top of the head, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large cautery on the crotch, and another one next to it, and two cauteries on both shoulders;
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	and two cauteries on the elbows, and two cauteries on the tendons of the feet, and one cautery on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the knuckles of the hands;
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and be careful not to burn the nerves that are located behind the anus;
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	and sometimes make one cautery on the bone of the wrist, and another one on the bone of the stomach, and another one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And you should know that the more you do cauterization, the more it helps, and moves him to profit.
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And you should know that the patient feels no pain from cauterization as a healthy person does, because the body is already entirely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cautery be large or small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	Afterwards, treat the area with a paste of flour and honey and other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When swelling comes in any limb and is cured by medicine, oils, and poultices, but it is not healed, then he should do cauterization on the limb according to the size of the limb.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	And let the cauterization be a little bit inside the thickness of the skin.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And sometimes cauterization is done to the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that makes the limb mute, and thus the swelling is removed.
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And yet one should not interfere with this unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves that move the body.Car s’il est trop oignie le nerf, adonques li enfleure ne se porra ostre,
de albaras	of alder trees
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the disease called "albaras" is awakened, and the instruments of medicine are of no avail, then cauterize it with a cautery somewhat deeply, according to the quantity of the thick humors, until the whiteness is removed, and its color changed.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	then treat with a poultice of wheat flour and lentils, with rose oil, plantain leaves, blood from the bowel, and blood from the almond vein, each ingredient in equal parts.
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and mix it all together, then bind it with a cloth and keep it in place until the patient is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of sores by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a ulcer comes at its beginning, and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with the cautery that looks like a circle, all around the edge of the ulcer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And still, the wise men say that one should also cauterize the middle of the ulcer:
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	but I do not think this is good, because I fear that it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen this happen more than once.
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	and a more direct thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery which is called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot subside
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it is slow to heal because of the excess that it causes or because of the age of the malady when it is decrepit (that is, very old) and he has little blood, or because of the season;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you see it hastening to die:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	then cauterize it all around with many small cauteries, piercing;
aprés le laisse ensi.	afterwards leave it thus.If you find a wound that is suppurating and has
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	Because it will hasten death.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing all the way through, then heat the cautery tool from which comes the form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" until the cauteries pierce the skin, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels them spreading out in such a way that the flow of the pus is relieved.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Afterwards, treat it until it is perfectly healed.Et si li malaides ne se peust curer de cele maladie qui est apelée  «adubelati», adonques le metent en milieu del bed et le cure par cauteres que il n’ait point de sang; et s’il ne peust guérir, la mort l’alera.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cure by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of illness there is which is called "corroding", and it is nothing other than a melting of the limbs, for it melts the limbs just as fire melts dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you find this disease in a place that can endure cautery with fire, then heat the cauteries small and large, according to what is appropriate for the location of the disease;if you find it in a place that cannot endure cautery with fire, then take the cauteries which are made from iron and stone and which are called  "circles", and heat them, both small and large, as is fitting for the location of the disease.
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	after you cauterize it all over until you reach the healthy tissue underneath, and none of the corruption remains, only the healthy tissue is left.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for 3 days, and put on the cauterized spots a poultice with oil until the burns from the fire are healed, and all the corruption is removed.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After that, treat it with ointments that generate heat.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if after 3 days, healthy flesh does not grow back, that is good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	and if not, then begin the cautery again on what remains of the corrupt tissue.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this wound has sometimes been cured by medication instead of fire cautery;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	but nonetheless, fire cautery is the greatest help, and I have already described the cure for the medication ague in the division:
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of sores that come on the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that through defect a disease called 'clot' according to our understanding arises in the feet, and is a large, faulty thing that blocks the toe.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauteries for this disease are according to two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	They are: fire cautery and hot water cautery.Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres: cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Fire cautery should be heated until it is as hot as a feather, and made of good iron to the size that it can pierce the nail on all sides, with thin edges;
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	after putting it all hot on the nail, turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail;
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	and leave it thus for three days until pus begins to flow out;
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	then make a poultice of wild mallows ground with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted by its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the area with a soothing ointment until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are turned the wrong way round in the body, and often happen in hands and feet, then you must treat them with hot water cautery;
et est en teil maniere:	and it is done like this:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	take an iron or bronze rod, or a needle, and put it on the nail and the wart, that is to say, warts;
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	and put the rod on it so that it cuts all around, then put a little hot water on it, and hold your hand steady, and press your hand as you turn the rod so that its edge comes to the root of the nail, and it can find the hot water deeply enough to reach the root;
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	and let the patient endure the biting of hot water for a little while.
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	then leave it thus, and it will pull out by its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another, until you draw out all those who are in the body, then cure them of the wounds that engender pus.
li cure dou trembler	the cure for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When someone shakes from coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever, or other, you must make 3 or 4 cauteries on the spine of the back, 1 cautery between each spine.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and 1 cautery on the penis, and 1 on the stomach with olive-oil cautery;
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	it will cease the shaking and hasten the health from the cold disease.Car les ners tremblent par moistor qui vient de l’estomac, et le feu qui vient del nerverie du dos
des pustules puans	of stinking pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes they appear as sores on the body, or stinking pustules, that come from large corrupted matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	Indeed, the nerves shake from moisture that comes from the stomach, and fire that comes from the nerve centre in the backSo it is fitting, when they first appear, to make cautery on each tip of the pustule:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	with a thin cautery wand made from myrtle wood, whose tip is taken up in fire, or with long roots of aristolochia, or with a lens-shaped cautery.Et si est en la teste, si covient que li cauteres soient fitz sus la teste; et s’il tremble de fievre quartaine ou d’autre maladie,
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow from thereforth, but the superfluities from which they come are broken, and they are healed.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Many times there are great bloodlettings from the artery which is cut at the wound that comes from the opposite side, or in the incision of an abscess, or in cauterizing a limb, and in similar things;
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	and it is very painful to stanch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And yet when this happens to anyone, you must hurry to place your finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it very firmly until the blood is staunched beneath your finger, and no more drips out;
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	then put into the fire several small and large olive-wood cauteries until they are all red;
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	then take I, either large or small according to the wound and where the artery is running, and apply the cautery to that vein where you are holding your hand, and keep the cautery there until the blood is staunched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it bleeds again when you lift your finger from the wound and the cauteries are extinguished, quickly take another of the cauteries that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not cease doing this one after the other until the blood is staunched.
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	And be sure not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and no other harm should come to the patient;
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	and know that when blood escapes from an artery, one cannot staunch it well by himself when the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have described:
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	either by cautery, or by extraction when it has not been treated, or by a strong ligature, or by medicines applied that have the power to staunch blood;
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	and it should be bound and compressed skillfully.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers a tight bandage or places burning objects on top, or similar things, will not benefit if only a little.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to someone and they do not have any mirrors or remedies at hand, then they should place their index finger on the wound as we have said, and press firmly until it is stretched over the wound and vein.
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	and do not move the finger but moisten it with cold water often so that it is very cold until the blood is congealed and swollen and stretched.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	and make inquiries beforehand about what he will need in terms of cautery and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of wound treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have told you in the first chapter about all the illnesses that require fire cautery, or burning remedies, and their origins, and the instruments, causes, forms of cautery;
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	and have placed in this chapter from the head to the feet, and I will go through this same way in this chapter so that one can more easily find what they are looking for.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus as I begin this, it is fitting, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and therefore greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in treating wounds, and in extracting arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things.
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to attempt foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	if they come from such people who are so accustomed to their illness that they die easily because of the familiarity with their disease and the severity of its nature;Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	and from these one must fear.Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu,
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And of these there are those who give their senses to you and say:'When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am drawing";
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the disease is desperate.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	You should not consent to those who come to you with this method, but place greater importance on your honor than your desire. Do not open recklessly but wisely what you are certain of and what you can obtain and heal.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	and use prognosis and diagnosis in treating your illnesses to which salvation may be converted;
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	and this will aid you to that good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have outlined this chapter for you in discussing chapter chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cautery, which I have discussed from the head down to the feet, so that you may more easily find what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	Know that this disease often comes to children when they are born, and when the neck is stretched too tightly from the child's head;
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	and sometimes it comes from an unknown cause that one does not know about.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I have never seen this disease except in children, and in all those I have seen death hastened;
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	and for this reason, it seems to me that I should divide the treatment into several parts.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	I saw a child whose head was full of water, and whose head swelled up every day so that he could not support it;
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and he believed that it was water, and this moisture gathered under the bone above the throat, between the heart and the bone;
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and the treatment is such that if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, you should make a large incision in the head;
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and it should be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture flows out;
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and see the shape of the spleen:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the fluid is deeper and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the edges of the head opening in each part, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand from within, and it does not return to you:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	Then you must split it open at the top with three cuts according to this method:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, draw out all the moisture forcefully.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After closing up the cuts with bandages and powders, pour in wine and oil and leave it like this for five days;
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Then remove the stitches and treat the wound with tenting and ointments, allowing the head to heal evenly, and give the patient dry meat from a dry pot until the limb is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another method of incision is that you look at where the abscess opens, and the gathering of pus;
car aucune fois est elle devant;	because sometimes it is in front;
aucune fois derrier;	sometimes behind;
aucune fois en destre;	sometimes on the right;
et aucune fois en senestre.	and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Cut it then where the abscess opens and the pus gathers, and fill according to what you are able;
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and guard against covering the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and let blood flow, so that the patient dies from blood loss and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	from gout
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When someone suffers from a condition called "cataract" in the eyes or elsewhere, and the disease is old, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then the last resort is cautery with which one will cut the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	Therefore, when you see them covered, have the patient lie on his back;
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	afterwards, rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries become visible, then press the patient's neck tightly with the cloth;
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	then look where the vein beats, and the spots on either side are after the ears, and they are pressed down;
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	then sign the spots inwards, then cover one and press with a sharp spatula on both sides until the vein comes to the bone, and this should be done from the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see that, put the spatula under the artery and cut it from above, cutting through as well about two fingers across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, let the blood flow continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not open to the touch, then you must measure the amount of space three times, then sign inwards and press until it comes to the bone;
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	and that which is needed for the blood to flow out is six ounces, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the fullness of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	then look at the wound.
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	if there remains a point on the bone where pus does not come out, then open the wound and drain it, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of the emetic
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient vomiting comes, and a sharp catarrh, due to moisture from the tears and heat in the temples and ancient madness and similar things, and he is treated by various methods of medicine and all that does not help him, then we should open the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the method of extracting them is that the patient should press behind his temples, and listen to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is not very strong compared to some men who are too cold;
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	and if it is weak, the patient should hold his neck with some cloth, then rub the area with some rough cloth, and wash the area with warm water until the artery opens clearly;
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	then take the spatula, which has a flat shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	then gently cut the skin until you reach the artery, then pull it upwards with tweezers and carefully separate it from the tissues beneath in every part.
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	and if the artery is thin, then turn it with the hook to the tip of the nail, then cut off that part according to the quantity of the two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, then the sick person's life hangs by a thread.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And draw out the blood for a third of an inch, up to half an inch. Et s’il vout adobir la croute et la
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	And if the artery is large, then you must tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread so that pus does not come before the healing of the wound, and let the blood flow naturally.Et s’il vout adobir la croute et la
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	Then cut away the excess between the two ties in that same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a hot iron up to the bone until the shoulder is cut through.Et s’il vout adobir la croute et la
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	and it is a good treatment, if the patient does not have a fever and is of a hot temperament.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For fire cautery is helpful in drying out moisture:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	therefore it is even more beneficial for moistness.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	Or, for the extraction of arteries, one must fill the area with old cotton and place it under well-made tents;
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and when they are removed, they should be treated with dry remedies that promote the formation of scar tissue, and with tents, until they are healed;
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	and if, without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, you hasten to cover it with cautery, then employ the area with vitriol and hold it in your hand so that the blood is staunched;
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	and if you do not have that at hand, then put your finger on the area until the blood congeals, and apply cold water to the area until the bleeding stops, and then press it as necessary;
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	and that which is more painful and easier to extract the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery in two parts, but the cutting should be well-spaced to guard against their heat for a longer time.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the strumenti is too thin, it holds its heat less well.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And there should be a finger's width of space between the two knives, and then when you have cut into both sides, place the hot iron upon it until it reaches the bone, and close the vein in two places.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	and they should be spaced far apart between the two shoulders because they are not fused together by this cautery from top to bottom;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears from the eyes are flowing down the veins that are above the forehead, and no medicine benefits it, and you see the face of the sick person turn red, and feels movement in the forehead as if trembling;
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and if they are pale and moist so that the hair of the eyelids has fallen out, and the eyelids are scorched and blistered from the heat of the tears, then this treatment is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And they called it the "crushed cure" in old French, and it is that you do to the patient who has this disease by making the hair on his forehead, then make three slits on the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead;
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	and one of the slits should be about two fingers' width from the bridge of the nose, running down towards the nose, and the other two on either side of the eyelids, and beware of cutting the arteries that are on either side of the eyelids;
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	and keep your hand away from the jaw, and each cut should be about three fingers' width apart across the forehead;
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	and have ready a piece of sponge and plenty of bandages to wipe away the blood, then fill the spatula with two parts of the mixture from which comes the form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	from the incision that is on the temple all the way to the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	and scrape all the skin that is between the two incisions down to the bone, then do likewise from the middle incision to the other second one, and then remove this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Then insert into the first incision the instrument called "culter", which is very sharp on one side and smooth on the other, and it is shaped thus:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the knife's edge towards the chest cavity at the heart, and the flat side towards the bone, and push it in until it reaches the median incision.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And close off all the vessels that descend from the head into the eye sockets as far as the incision extends to this one which opens from the brain, and then likewise do so in the middle incision to the other outside;
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	and then draw out blood equally, and express the area for the taken blood;
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	then place in each incision a tent of old cotton, and place on top wet bandages soaked in wine and oil and garlic, and be careful that hot abscesses do not come to it;
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and on the third day loosen the bandage, and administer a large quantity of tepid water, then treat it with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other remedies used for treating wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	from the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When someone suffers from acute cataracts, and you see the eyes sunken and small, and the vision weakened, and the eyelids burnt:
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	and the hair falls out, and in the head there is great pain, and the patient sneezes;
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	then you may know from these signs that those substances and this cataract come from many veins, and the mother fluid that is in it, is thus.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you command the patient to turn his head back, then make a large slit in the middle of the forehead, and another from the broad nose.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And begin the incision from the left temple to the right temple, and let it reach to the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move the jaw;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is uncovered, he should suck all the blood with a sponge and then open between the two lips of the cut and put in old cotton and linen bandages;
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	then he should bind damp cloths soaked in wine and oil over it, and guard against hot abscesses;
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	when it is removed, you should rub the bone until pus starts to come out, then clean it with drying substances that cause the pus to dry up.
En teil maniere:	In this way:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	take two parts of chamomile and four parts of cress, and make an ointment out of it;
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	and administer it to wounds to dry up pus everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the ear stoppers
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	All that falls from the ears is one of four things:ou bien est de la chair ou de l’os, ou sang ou mukuge, et si doit on regard
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	or grains, or a stone, or similar objects like iron.
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	or seed, like peas, beans;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	or fluid things like water and garlic and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it falls into the ear, whether stone or other matter that does not adhere to the ear, nor grow in the ear, then put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see the stone, then distil a little violet oil or oil of sweet fennel, then administer an emetic;
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	and make him sneeze with incense, and plug his nose when he sneezes, and put cotton wool or cloth around his ears;
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and plug the ear from above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Often this treatment works;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not work, then administer an emetic with subtle pincers, in which way there is the following form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If it comes out with the pincers, that's good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	if not, then administer an emetic with the tip of a sharp, small blade;
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	and if it does not come out with that, then make a brass needle and put the tip of the needle into the hole in the ear firmly, and stop up around the needle with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the needle;
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	then treat it further, because it often comes out as we have said.
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	and if it does not come out in this way, then use glue on cotton and put it around the nail.
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if it does not come out with all these things that we have said, then split the ear so that pus and fluid can drain, and for a spasm;
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	and the way to split it is that you first make an incision in the head of the patient, and draw blood according to the amount of its strength, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear up, and split a small opening at the root of the ear where the cartilage connects;
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	and cut it like a moon, as far as you can go to the stone, then suck it energetically with your mouth;
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and cure it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if there are grains in the wound and it swells, then administer an extractive remedy;
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	and if it cannot come out, then administer a thin spatiumile according to this formula:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and administer an incision on that spot.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not do this if you think the grains are moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces;
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	then extract it with subtle tweezers and with a sucking instrument, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In acute conditions when fluid drains into the ear, the patient should first sneeze from congestion, and open the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let him lie on that very ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps out because of this, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	If not, take many small stones according to the length of your finger, thin and light, and heat them slightly in fire;
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	And he puts a hollow reed in the patient's ear, and it protrudes from his foot on the other side, and he pierces another stone upon the stone which is in the ear;
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and he does not cease to pierce from stone to stone until the water flows out entirely, and thus it flows out completely;
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	and if you see that he has a reed, and puts one end in the ear, and the other end in fire until the hottest reed is burnt;
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	then do the same with other reeds until the water flows out entirely, as we have said for the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In extracting a foreign object from the body, if it is small like a louse or similar, remove it as we have said in the section on division;
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if it is large enough to be felt, apply the forceps for extraction;et se li corps soit grant et pesans, si doit on le lever et le mouvoir tant qu’il soit estrain, car s’il li estran en
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	and it is the easiest thing to remove which is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the section on distillations, and the treatment does not help, then you must look into the ear towards the sun:
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	if it appears that there are no worms, then squeeze them with tiny pincers, and if they don't appear, then take the skin where the shape is.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	It is tight below and loose above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And put the thinnest end of an ear pick into the ear according to the amount of suffering of the malady, then suck firmly on the entire skin;
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	do this repeatedly until all the worms emerge.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they don't come out, then stop up the ear with cotton as I said in the section on stones;
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	and if they do not protrude as we have said, then administer the distillation that the ancients have tried in the removal of worms, and you will find it in the treatise on distillation.
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this equipment, whose form is as follows:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And it should be made of silver or bronze with small holes underneath, and open on top for distillation.
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	And to force the distillation into the instrument, use a bronze vessel especially made for this purpose. And if you see fit, take a razor and wrap cotton around the tip.
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	Then pour your oil or juice, and whatever you wish from your remedies into the tube, and let the tube be in the ear.
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	Then put the razor, wrapped in cotton, into the ear and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled into the outer ear.
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	and let the patient feel the heat within, and let the distillation be heated over fire so that it is distilled into the ear;
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the ear stoppers
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	Some children are born without any holes in their ears;
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	and the same thing happens in adults due to wound plugging, or from pus forming inside the ear, and this plugging sometimes occurs deep in the ear, so it cannot be seen;
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	and sometimes the hole is pushed out, and one can see it clearly.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	When it occurs deep inside, and one cannot see it, it is a sign of poor healing in many cases, and in such cases, you should expose the ear to the sun;
et regarde dedens:	and look inside:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	if you see the wound exposed, then treat it with this spasm:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And it should be sharp and pointed in front and behind, so that it does not cut the ear;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	if the wound is on the soft flesh of the ear, then hold it with fine pincers and cut it lightly until all the flesh is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the growth is deep in the ear, take a narrow, thin razor and heat it slightly in the fire, then apply it to the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel that the patient feels pain when you hear it, pierce lightly and be careful not to cut the nerves of the ear;
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	then put a tent into the ear according to the size of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.Et li tient legierement tant que l’ointement soit absorbe, et remets le tent, si tant com il ne se blece point.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Hold it lightly until the ointment is absorbed, and remount the tent, so that it does not hurt. Do this every day until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and dust on powdered vitriol;
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and if you see the ear swollen, then you should draw out the tent and move another moist tent made of cerate that is made from rose oil and wax, until the swelling goes down.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, soak a sponge and cloth in cold water, and apply it to the ear; and use other treatments that stop the bleeding from the distilling veins.
de la char des papieres	of paper charcoal
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	The hair that grows from the ears when they are moist and dry, you should straighten with tweezers and pincers, and cut off the root of a spatumile;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	then put powdered vitriol on the spot.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if there is pus under the skin, then gently cauterize with a lens-shaped cautery, and after the incision the muces come out;
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	and many times they return, because nothing remains of their roots;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	and when they are cauterized by fire, then those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of hail
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Many times come in papers from themselves one thing that looks like gravel in its shape and hardness, and because of this disease is called "hail," and is a gathering of thick moisture on the paper above and below.
li ovraiges est telz:	the works are such:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	Take care if the hailstone is silent on both sides, and that is an easy thing to know;
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Then cut it open widely, then scrape off the skin of each part gently, then take it with tweezers, and peel it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	If you cannot peel it without piercing the paper a little, it will not harm the patient;
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	And if the tear is large, then sew it up, and treat it until it heals;
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	And if it is small, do not use much force, for the natural oils will restore it immediately and heal the wound.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the hail is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, then turn the paper upside down, and hold the hail with tweezers, and squeeze it from both sides;
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	and if the paper is displaced by the incision, that doesn't matter;
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	and when the hail is squeezed, then wipe the wound with salt water, and clean the area of any pus until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat around the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinch is a grease that forms inside the eyelids of children more than adults, and it causes great pain to them, and they experience catarrh in the mornings, and cannot stand the light of the sun because their tears flow continuously.
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	And because they sleep with their faces down, and because their eyelids are moist, their eyes become puffy and the appearance of their eyes is covered by the exinch, which causes the eye to water.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the area with your fingers and feel the exinch between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the manner of the operation is such that the patient puts his head on top of yours.
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	Then take a linen cloth and prepare it into a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains exudate from each part, then put it over the wound.
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	And press with your fingers on either side so that the exudate is collected within the circle.
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	Then cut an opening in the center of the moisture with a spatula, making a slit that is no wider than the wound being drained.
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	And cut through to the skin as deeply as needed until you reach the exudate.
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	In several applications, exudate comes out of the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Therefore, extract it all with your fingers between your thumb and forefinger, rotating your hand from left to right until it is removed.
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	and be careful not to cut into the fissure, so that you do not reach all the way to the eye, lest you injure it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the outlet does not open at the beginning of the fissure, then widen the fissure slightly until it appears.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	Then extract as we have said, then moisten with rags in vinegar and water, and apply to the site, and extract with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who grind seal and put it on to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the cure until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is a hot abscess in that place, then treat it with soothing poultices until it is healed.And if there is a hot abscess in that place, then treat it with soothing poultices until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	of the hair of papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When hairs grow from the paper which are not of their nature, and they become entangled, then they harm the eyes, and bring about various diseases, as with tears accustomed and softening of the papers and membrane, until it becomes a cause of destruction to the eyes;
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	and there is treatment according to 4 methods:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	either by cautery with fire, or by medicine applied directly to the eye, or by incision and stitching, or by canes, according to what I will describe.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	You should place the patient's head on your lap, then return the bandage around his eye to your left hand.
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	If it is converted, that is good;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	if not, then you push an needle through the thread above it.
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and cut through the margin of the bandage where the hairs grow next to these hairs and draw the thread above it throughout the bandage and return it to the shaver;
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	then they should do the same under the bandage, under the hairs next to them, all the way to the great artery by the ear, until they reach the small one.
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	Then pull the thread out and place a small tent made of cotton and linen under the bandage, then draw a figure on top of the bandage like a mulberry leaf, although the figure should vary depending on how much you want the bandage to rise where it is divided in two.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if it is on a part that requires this, apply a large amount of paper according to how soft the paper is;
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	then do the spathanile over the two lines you have marked, and start from the large armpit up to the small one;
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	and let one of the slits be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a hair root, then plug it with the point of a needle in one of the two corners of the heart, then peel it all off;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	then sew the two lips together with a thread of fine woollen yarn, and stop the bleeding, and dry up the excess thread over the two eyelids with any sticky substance, if you see fit to do so;
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	and if not, don't worry about it and leave the sewing and threads for three or four days;
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	then dress the wound without sewing with dry and constricting things, for paper shrinks when the wound is souded and closed, but the stitch is moved (as the ancients say), and this work is done without fear.
et si a une autre maniere:	and if there is another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and it is that you sign the paper with a shape that is also like the leaf of myrrh, as we have described it, at 3 inches apart according to the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut out those on top with small scissors evenly according to the shape that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you do not have the strength to hold the tweezers, and the object is not even, so take a needle or thread, and put it in among the shape.
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	And put another thread through the large artery, and the second thread through the small one, and bring together between your fingers the threads evenly;
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then lift your hand evenly and lift all the skin on which you have signed, as we have described it, then bring together the two lips of the wound by sewing, and dress it until it is healed.
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerate and similar soothing ointments;
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	and sometimes the hair of the paper is converted:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	if you should use what we have said about the incision;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but the stitching in both is more artifical.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment of bones is as follows:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and you should convert the paper and cut it inside according to what I have said, then make two bones by art, and two subtle strings as long as the paper and the width of the spathamile is;
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and cut as two heads from both parts where you hold the threads;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then assemble one and the other subtly above what rises from the paper of the eye, and strain the two bones from their formed parts;De la dislocation de la teste et de la nuque si est que tu convers le membre en la jointe ains que li chiés ne se desjoignent:
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and let it stay like that for a few days, and the skin that was stretched will die and become hard and fall off as it heals.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it takes time, if the wound has a lot of pus, then treat the wound until it is healed;
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	and when the wound is sutured and the paper is lifted, the hairs will no longer grow;
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	and this is the shape of the two cones that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and breadth:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	the work is such that you pierce an aiguille-like needle, and through it thread a silk thread;
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	then join the heads and tie them tightly, and the length of the threads should be a palm long;
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	then place in the socket another short silk thread, and tie the ends of the thread;
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	then put the patient's head on your lap;
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	and with the sun shining on it so that the work is visible, because it is a subtle and fine operation. Then push the needle all the way into the root of the hair, and pierce through the skin gently until you reach the natural hair;
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	then pull out the hair all the way to the root, and put in the socket that hair, if there are 1 or 2 or 3 or more;
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	then pull your hand away so that the hairs grow out through the skin with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the socket is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then you must pull the socket from below all the way to the thread that you have tied there, until the socket comes out through the hole above and you see it with your eye;
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	then you will pull out the hair and thread, and close the eye and leave it for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh heals over it;
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	and if the hair is short, accompany it with a long hair from the eyelashes, and let it grow with it until it is elongated and then pull it out.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the eyelash
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this disease called 'alopecia' or hair loss occurs in the eye, there are two ways:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	one is natural and the other is unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or a cut, or cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the way to treat it is to split that sutured skin, and loosen the eyelids, and place linen pads inside, and keep it clean until it heals;
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	and you must not use in its treatment anything that dries and constricts.Et la seconde maniere est que li poilz de l’oil, li quels sont petis, seche et descuit, et s’en
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before;
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but work with softening things, such as fenugreek;
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and the rose of water or altée and flaxseed are cooked, and diaquilon oils melted in any oil, and wrapped in a tent, and the cure of this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the treasures of your cure are that you must be careful that it does not harden again according to the form it was before;
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	and these works that we have said are not strong except as remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to the form it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease, which is below, is truly called "axacrati", and it is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	Accidents come from wounds and tears and cauterizations and similar things;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	and the way of the work in it is that you pierce a needle with a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left eye to the right, so that the threads come out in two places on the body;
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	then draw the thread through the eye of the needle, and tie it tightly around the spatulum.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the shape of the paper returns according to what is appropriate, that is good;
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	if not, then take a razor and insert it into the slit, and turn the paper over, and make two slits along the side within the paper;
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	and let the slits of the two sides be at the two corners of the incision that you have made, and make angles so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of the letter "I" in Greek;
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	then remove that thread, according to the quantity that its sides are sharp underneath, from that which follows the paper; then join together the two separated parts and sew them with a lamb's wool thread;
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it according to what we have said about medicaments for softening and tenting, until he is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the disease comes from a split or a stitch or cautery, then you should make a clean split beneath the hairs of the eyelids, and according to what is mentioned above.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	then remove the tent between the two lips, as I have said;
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	and the procedure should be performed according to the form of the disease, because it is very diverse in form, and the wise master prepares an instrument with all his power so that he makes the figure return to its natural form.
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And the patient himself, according to what he needs in terms of procedure and instruments, in many different ways.
dou soudement de la papiere	suddenly from the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this soudure happens to men in such a way that the papery eyelid is separated from the white of the eye and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must therefore insert the tip of a razor beneath the papery eyelid and gently lift it upward;
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	and stretch them until you reach the subtle sphincter, which is neither too tight nor too loose, so that the patient can bear it and the eye is not damaged by the sphincter being too tight.
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	and make your incision on this membrane gently, so that it returns to its natural shape;
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	and cleanses the entire membrane, and sometimes they make an incision in the eye for pus to drain, and they flush it with clean water and apply a poultice;
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	then they place a piece of linen between the membrane and the eye, and put a pad soaked in egg yolk over the eye.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	and after three days, they use an ointment and poultices until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	You should know that there are two types of fingernails:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	one is nervous and similar to hard skin, and the other is not nervous but resembles congealed white moisture; when touched with iron and pinched, it feels nothing.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	and both start towards the large tear duct, and grow little by little until they cover the entire eye and all light and movement.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the method of incision is that the patient should look down at you, then he should open his eyes wide:
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	take the paper in your hand, then use your fingernails like small pincers, and stretch them upwards;
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	then take a needle, and thread it with horsehair, or cow hair, or bull hair, and strong thread;
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	then pierce the needle all the way through, and tie the hair to the eye with a thread, and stretch it upwards, and scrape along the hairline of the eyelid towards the tear duct with subtlety and gentle force, leaving the natural flesh of the tear duct untouched so that the incision does not cause the flow of tears;
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	and sometimes the nails come off at the cuticle only, and on the nailbed, as we have said;
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	then one scrapes all around the wound, so that this is the shape:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And be careful that the spatula does not touch the fleshy membrane and break it, and that the nailbed is not pierced;
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	and after making the incision, put a little powdered silver into the eye, and make an eye-patch from lime, and leave it until the next day;
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it as necessary until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the nail is not sensitive, and you cannot pierce it with a needle, and the cuticle will not go in, this kind of nail is often cured by medicines;
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and they grow as I have described in the section on division, and if you see it covered, then treat the eye of the patient, and take the spatula with a small pointed end according to this shape:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And raise the nail gently, and if you see that it does not narrow and the pus is pressing out, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litharge and red copper ore ground together, and stop up the eye until the next day.
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	then start the other work according to this same method, until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is nothing contrary in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then start the work again as before, until it is healed.Si li ungle est ost, adonques tu le remets, et si li est alongie, adonques tu le rompts; car il ne poait demorer a son leu.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the flesh in the eyelid hurts in the eye greatly, then suspend it on a hook, and cut off a portion of it and not all of it so that the body of tears does not come;
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	then distill into the eye red collar made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh which grows above the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	In some people's eyes, red bumps sometimes grow, covering the eyeball and sticking to the eyelids, and they look like a rose of marble;
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	and the treatment is for the patient to put his head in the right position, then he works the eyes, and then all that body part into appropriate hooks, and hold it there with strength;
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	then cut the first hair, and go all the way to the root, being careful not to hurt the eye during treatment;
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	and it is done with the knife of the spurge plant that we described in the incision of the nail and with small tools from which one removes the pus, as the form after this chapter demonstrates;
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	and when the incision is complete and all the pus removed, then apply the eye of a seal mixed with red colloid and similar corrosive medicines, and place over the eye a cotton pad soaked in egg white so that it is secured from hot abscesses;
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	and if nothing remains and the blood circulates freely, and you doubt a hot abscess, then leave the eye and treat the abscess with things that soothe hot abscesses;
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do as often as the eye is adjusted in this way.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	However, you should also lighten the treatment of each weak eye in the natural way:
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and in accidental work, with iron;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	and do not push your hand into any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of them
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Thus are red veins which are covered on the eye, and tolerates one's vision and weakens the eye all day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	So it is necessary that you first examine the eye, to see if it is swollen, and if there is no other disease except the swelling;
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	then treat it in this way:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	instruct the patient to put his head in yours, then open those veins all around gently, and let the veins be subtle and doubled according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let two compresses be in degrees in .i. body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	then open those veins forcefully, and draw the blood hour after hour, until you see the veins removed from the eye;
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	and be careful not to harm the eye with the tips of the spatules, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very careful in your work so that you do not poke through those veins.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	And when you have done this, distill into the eye a green and red colloid to corrupt what is left of the ulcer.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you cannot collect all of it in that hour, then make a poultice for the eye from soothing things to alleviate the pain of the eyes, and leave it for several days until the pain is relieved and the hot abscess has settled, then begin again according to the method described above until it is healed.
et c’est li forme des forces:	And this is how you make the solution:
de la fistule de l’oil	of eye fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The plant called "arissati" milfoil:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	When you have treated it with cautery and medicine as I have described above, and it is not healed, then cut into the abscess where it should be, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.Et si li os est touchez et les forces de la fistule se despartent ou s’estengient, si est la fistule sane;
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is uncovered, you will see the corruption and blackness; then examine all the instruments by which this form occurs.
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	It is called "sharp head", and it should be made of iron and sharpened like a file as it appears in this illustration.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And place it over the location of the corrupted bone, then twist it between your fingers and press your hand slightly until you feel that the corruption has been removed.
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And do this several times, then dress the wound with drying medications.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the wound is closed and healing occurs, and the skin of the bowels has healed over a period of 40 days without any bad incidents or relapses, then you may know that it is healed.
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	If not, if there is anything else but to bring the fistula back to the opening of the navel according to this illustration:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	and you uncover the bone a second time with iron and sharp medicines; and when it is uncovered, it takes on the shape of the iron according to this form, and let the head of the iron be three-pointed and the shaft be tapered to the tip as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	then he puts it on the bone below the eye, and moves his hand away from the eye slightly, then returns to pushing the iron in until it penetrates the bone and the patient feels it through the pressure of the wind if he holds his hand over his nose;
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	then restore the area with dry remedies as I have taught you, and when the flesh has grown back and hardened, examine the matter under the nail;
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	if it is a lighter object to the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eyes are fully open and there is no disturbance or weakening in the nose, then you must ligature the patient;
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	then let him sweat, then apply cupping glasses or a hot compress without burning to draw out the poison, then put on an ointment made of acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla over the eye, then bind it with bandages and cloth;
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	and the method of the bandages is that you fold soft cloth several times, then place one on top of the other depending on how much the eye needs;
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	then tie it tightly with a sturdy bandage and restart the cupping glasses to draw out the poison without burning;
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	then remove the cupping glasses and leave the eye bound tightly day and night, and if the bandage becomes loose, then you must tie it tightly again;
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	then remove the bandage after a day and a night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good;
se ce non;	if not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	then restart the plaster, bandages, leeches, and cupping until he is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	from a torn woven fabric
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When disruption comes in the woven fabric, then it opens, and comes out of the paper like a grain of resin, and is terrible to see;
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	then, if you see it covering, the work is such that you insert a needle into the root of the affected part, just above the elbow joint, then insert another needle where there is a double thread in the arm;
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and have it pierced, and leave the first needle according to its position;
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then cover the double thread and tie a part of the skin around it tightly, then withdraw the needle and put on another wet egg yolk;
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and let it be until the thread cuts through the skin, then treat the wound with comforting things until it is healed;
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and sometimes the wound is constrained by a cloth wrapped around it on all sides, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the eyes cause great pain, then pierce them with a sharp spathum that comes from within the eye, and dry up the watery albumen and lower the eyes, and enter them immediately.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	then extract it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the socket of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease called "alcunnati" has no cure except for cow's milk that is collected in the eye, resembling water but not being water;
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	and the method of treating it is to have the patient sit on a prepared seat and straight, then hold their head with both hands and move it until you see the milk come out from above your eyes;
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	then let him remain thus, and let the light be dimmed and let him see things as he used to;
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if they do not go down, know that it is acute, and if the bowels do not move as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the spatulum and press it gently on the conjunctiva under the cornea and the cornea itself, until the bowels move.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when it is issued, then distill into the eye a warm mixture of honey and water or fenugreek that has been boiled in water, then let it be treated with another remedy until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the eye waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have already discussed the signs of acute conditions and how to diagnose them:
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	Now we will discuss treatment according to health status.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	You should make the patient sit between your hands with his eyes closed and away from sunlight, then open the healthy eye wide and press it firmly.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	then put the paper to your left eye if the eyes are left-handed, or to your right eye if they are right-handed;
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left-handed, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are right-handed;
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	then put the tip of the instrument near the edge of the cornea by the thickness of a hair in that white part of the eye where the lesser tear duct is located, then gently push the instrument called "almagda" through, and turn your hand so that almagda enters the empty space; feel for it to reach the hollow:
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	and the depth of the path of almagda should be at the bottom of the space between the pupil and the edge of the iris:
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	and it is the crown of the eye;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	you will see the bone through that film due to the clarity of the corneous tissue, then place the instrument where the water is, and then express it below one way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the pain descends now, then the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After rest for a little, and if the water rises back up the second way, force it out with the instrument, and when it is pushed in and does not rise, gently pull out the almagda by turning your hand a little bit at a time;
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	then put in some water with a little sealing wax, and leave the eye inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then, push the eye out with force, using a wet sponge or lamb's wool in rose oil and an abundance of egg white, and bind it with clean cloth.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, put on a mixture of comfrey with an abundance of egg white.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almgada cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some people who have very hard eyes, then you must use the instrument called 'albarit', which has this form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And so pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep, but make the hole small, then insert the almagda, as we have said;et il li covient boire l’oil, et metre dedens un poc de seil gemme por le conseruer, et li covient leure un poc de sang de son corps par la matinie sus la piere et les membres
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	and at the completion of the work, prepare the patient for sleep by having him lie on his back in a dark place.
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	and he should avoid all movement and eat light foods. He should not move his head to the right or left, and should be bound according to his condition for three days.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	Then he should be untied in the same dark place, and his vision tested. He should then be shown some objects, and then have the bandage put back on for seven days.
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	You must not do this during the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but you should lighten it so that the water rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	If a warm abscess comes, untie the eye before the seventh day, and apply something that soothes abscesses.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	and when it is soothed, then loosen the bandage and place a blindfold over its face to cover any light, and let it be in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	And then exit the house little by little, and return to your senses;
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	and know that no disciple should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And one came to us who was from Spain, who told us that in his land they made a medicine called almagda, which drew out pus, but nevertheless I have never seen anyone in our land make it, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients;
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	and perhaps it is a new thing.Et si on le fait, il faut que li homes soit en bon teint et sans
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagda, so that those who do not know them may see them;
et soient d’arain proprement:	and they should be made of clean iron:Et il faut que li homes qui le fait soit en
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let the heads be of the same subtle metal, and the rear in 3 angles sharp.
de la char sor le neis	of the heart through the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	At times, various deformed children are born, among whom there are some who resemble scorpions at the base of their feet.
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	And if there are any with a fissure in their skin of a red color, and if any have a soft swelling of a white color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	For those with a soft swelling and not a fissure, you should have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun;
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and open his nose, and pour the oil onto those swellings, and draw them out;
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	then grasp what you can with a fine spatula on one side, as long as you know that the swelling is completely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if anything remains which cannot be removed, open it with the smallest and thinnest instrument so that nothing remains;
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and if without difficulty, or an abscess forms, cut it as it should be;
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	and if it is malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize them until the pus is drained and all the putrefaction is removed, then pour cold water or vinegar or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If it works on the nose, and moisture comes up to the palate, you know he's cured;
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	and if moisture does not break through as it should, you know that there is putrefaction in the bone above, and the instruments will not work to cut it out:
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	therefore you should bind a thread of coarse linen around it, and tie it with the fingers of one hand, and between each knot make an interval of a finger or less;
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	and let the patient hold one end of the thread in his hand and pull it through his nose into his mouth;
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	and many times children do this at school, and it is an easy thing for anyone who wants to do it;
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	then hold the head that comes through the nose in one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth in the other hand, and pull them apart one after the other while being careful not to tear the membrane connecting them.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this until you know that the umbilical cord has been corrupted by the corrupt blood, then cut the cord, wipe away the blood, and wet the cord with Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Do this for three days or more, until the ointment has corroded all that remains of the flesh;
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	and then put a piece of cotton in the nose for several days until it is healed, and if it needs dry medicines, use them;
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	and this is the instrument for purging the head, through which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And it is of silver or bronze, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and lead them as well.
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	and if you see fit to make a closed cane, and let the instrument be filled for purging the head;
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	and it has a handle on the top to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the heart through the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times a disease arises in the head of the new-born, called "telul", which grows and becomes large, until it is a sight to behold;
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	and for this reason you should cut it at the beginning and remove all of its flesh, then place upon it the cautery or burning medicine;
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	and if one delays in cutting it until it has grown large, then take heed whether it is hard, dark-coloured, and lacking sensation:
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	don't touch it with iron, for it is an encrusted abscess; for when one cuts it, great harm comes to the patient;
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	and if the abscess is from a soft touch, not from a pus-filled color, and you see that it can be completely covered, then empty the wound and cover it without fear, and treat the area with dry and constricting substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose has been cut and sewn up
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when a solution of continuance comes in one of these soft cartilage-like things, it benefits little, unless in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	Therefore, when this happens to someone, check if the wound is fresh with all its blood;
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then bring the two lips together with a stitch, then treat it until it is healed;
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	and if the lips are separated on both sides, then you should scrape all the parts of their skin until they heal, then bring the two lips together with a stitch, hold them in place, and apply powdered dragon's blood and ground incense;
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	and place a piece of strong plaster or other binding plaster over the powders, and leave it until it falls off on its own, then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The method of sewing is to assemble the thread:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or with needles as we have said in the sewing of the belly;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or with thread, as I have already told you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	In the lips of men there are hard abscesses inside, resembling beans in size, both small and large;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	therefore you should turn the lips inside out, and split each pustule, and squeeze it with tweezers, and cut into each part;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	then apply powdered vitriol to the wound after cutting, until the blood is staunched;
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then leave it with garlic, and clean the area of dry matter until it heals.
de la char des gencives	of gum swelling
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Many times a hard lump grows on the gums, which the old call 'albulus';
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	you should hold it with tweezers and cut it at its root, and let the pus or blood flow out;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	then put on the spot vitriol powder, or other restraining and drying powders;
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	and if this ulcer returns after the incision, and it happens many times, then the second time, cauterize it:
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	if it does not return after cautery;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	and these are the forms of fistulas for covering.
des sordens	of the eyes
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Sometimes they are assembled on the head of teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs which are ugly and rough;et si li dents s’en fuient, si doit aler a leu;
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	and if the teeth escape, then it should be treated; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow, and green, as far as the corruption comes to the gums, and the teeth stink;et li gencives seche et brulee et trante, si doit aler a leu de cautere et
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	and the gums dry and burned and torn, then it should be cauterized; and you must make the patient hold his head in your hands, and his teeth or sores appear, so that nothing remains;et tu sais que la coper par le chief ou li gencives est aspre et dure, si covient que tu le raines a l’incision ou au cautere.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	and thus do for darkness and greenness and yellowness and other discolorations, as long as they remain.
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	and if one removes what is at the first layer, that is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	if not, then recommence on the second day and the third, until you have removed everything;
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	and know that teeth require various instruments for removal, according to what the work demonstrates to you, because the rasors used to remove teeth have other forms than those used to remove between teeth;
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	and these forms and others should be prepared for you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	It is necessary when you cure a tooth of its pain that you delay drawing it as long as you can, because it should not be done quickly;
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	because it is a very sensitive substance until one has no excuse to draw it out.Et si li dent est trop dur et ne peut estre traie, qu’il le fust si boin com il esteuit;
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore, when the patient is compelled to withdraw, you must be certain about the toothache.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the pain deceives the patient, and he thinks it is in the tooth, and has the good tooth pulled out.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	Yet the pain does not go away because of this, until the bad tooth is extracted, for we have already tried it with these teeth:
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	And when you are quite certain of the aching tooth, then you must scrape around the tooth all around, spatulating strongly to push back the gum from all sides;
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	Then you must grab it with your fingers or with fine tweezers in the front and back, so that it is well loosened, then grip the tweezers tightly;
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	And let the patient sit in your lap, holding him steady so he does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	Afterwards, pull out the tooth firmly without breaking it, and if it does not come out, take one of those instruments and insert it into each side gently, and move it as you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	If the tooth is broken and eaten away, then you must fill the holes with cotton, where the holes are;
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and if they are gently squeezed with tweezers so that they do not break when being squeezed.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	and it is necessary to work gently around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be careful that you do not break it and leave a part behind, which will cause greater pain due to the root's toxicity.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And beware that you do not act like unskilled surgeons who, through their hastiness and boldness, sometimes break the jaw, and do not listen to what we have instructed.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but sometimes cause great harm through the roots by their probing, or break the jaw, as we have often seen.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	And when the tooth is pulled, wash the socket with wine or garlic and salt;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, apply powdered vitriol to the socket;
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	and if that does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The probes used to loosen the teeth should have long points and thick shafts so that they do not bend when you pull on the tooth;
et ce sont les formes:	and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be of thick members so that they do not bend when pulling, and they should be well-made of iron, and they should be toothed to hold the roots.
de la racine des dens	of the root of teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root remains in place, you should apply moist cotton on the area for one or two days until it softens, and then use tweezers called "algefri", which make the shoulder look like a bird's beak.
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	They should be made smooth inside, just as a file is made, and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tweezers, you must uncover the skin all around the root, and place the instrument called "althali", which is made of ivory, thus its form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	It should be thick and strong so that it does not break, and if the root slips out through it, that is good.
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	If not, use all the instruments, of which the forms come later:et li auter chiés soit en sa place tant com il convient, et li membrez soit adoblez par li tenailles, et li armeciers doit prendre leu de la piere s
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And one should also use this instrument with .ij. tweezers, of which the form is as follows:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools which are before in the reason of teeth, and with this instrument that resembles a large pair of tweezers, of which the form is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And the other shoulder should be in its proper place, and the bones should be pulled together with the tweezers, and the surgeon should take hold of the stone, and the instruments should be strong enough not to break. know that there are many instruments for teeth:et li auter chiés soit en sa place
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also other instruments which are not counted;
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and the experienced master surgeon finds by himself his instrument according to what his work and the illness show him, for there are many kinds of illnesses where the ancients did not teach any instrument because of their diversity; and if he does not break or displace a bone in the head or elsewhere, but only probes them, then he searches for the instruments that he needs, which I have told you about, and uses gestures to help himself, by which this is done:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And they should be thick and strong enough to hold the bone so that it does not slip but can be held and removed;
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	then restore the place with suitable medicine, and if there is a protuberance in the bone that is small, then treat it with this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When a tooth appears not according to the natural order of teeth and its shape is ugly, especially in young girls, then you should know whether the tooth is new after the baby tooth, and it is not in its proper place, and you cannot push it back or file it down;
adonques lou raie;	then cut the hair;
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	and if it is airy with the tooth, then take this instrument of which there is the shape, and is similar to a small beak, and be made of tempered iron:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And pull it gently day by day because of the hardness of the tooth and so that you do not move the others; and if it is apparent that it can be filed, then file it with a type of file like this:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and is also like the liming tool used for making needles;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and gently files the tooth a little bit at a time, so that it does not move until it breaks;
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	then smooth it at the end to a point, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, then file down the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not cut the tongue or impede speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth is loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the front teeth are loose from a blow or from falling, and the patient cannot chew without shitting, and you have tried binding remedies but to no avail;
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	if they need to be restrained with a gold thread, for silver threads turn green and rot, but gold never moves.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	and the thread should not be too thin or too thick, according to the quantity of space between the teeth;
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	and if you want to move the teeth, take the thread and wrap it twice between two healthy teeth, then put the tooth between the teeth, whether there is one or more of them, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side;
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	then restart the coverage until the part where you started, and strain your hand gently and firmly, so that it does not move;
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	and make sure it is tied at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then cut the teeth of the thread with pliers, and join them together, and tie them between the healthy tooth, and place it so that it does not hurt the tongue;
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	and then let it remain thus tight as long as it can stay, and if it comes undone, or the threads break, then tighten it with another thread;
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	if it remains and serves thus throughout its life, and that is the shape of teeth and the arrangement of both healthy teeth and diseased teeth, as you can see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when a tooth falls out, one replaces it in its place, fresh one after another, as we have said;
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and only a wise and experienced person should attempt this, and sometimes one makes a tooth from cow bone, and puts it in the place where there is a deficiency, and tightens it as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover the vein of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Sometimes this ligament which comes under the tongue, where nature is, causes one to be born thus;
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or by accident of a wound;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the treatment is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold his head in your hand, and lift his tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	then grab the nerve of the jaw, as wide as the tongue is dislodged from its place, and if there is hardness or swelling, and it is a sudden wound, then hook and grab that nerve firmly;
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and be careful that the cut is not too deep, for the artery that is underneath;
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	and when you have finished, raise the area with rose water and garlic, or with cold water, then place under the tongue a tent of linen;
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	and apply the cautery to the patient every night so that the wound cannot heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if bleeding occurs, put ground vitriol on the area;
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	and if the blood vessels bleed, then cauterize them with a slow-burning cautery, which is good for this.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	then clean it with another cleaning until it is clean,
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	and if you see a black or dark-colored sore, or a hard one that the patient does not feel, then do not touch it, for it is gangrene;
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	and if it is inclined towards white, and there is moisture in it, then open it with a sharp instrument, and release it from both sides;
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	and if the blood vessels bleed with your treatment, then put powdered vitriol on it until it is stanched, then return to your treatment until you draw out all the poison;
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then lift up the armpit and underarm, and clean it with other cleanings until it is clean.
des apostemes de la gorge	of abscesses in the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	At times, lumps develop in the throat that are called "godath," and they are properly called almonds. And when you treat them as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, be careful:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	if they are hard abscesses of little size and a dusky colour, do not touch them with iron.si son grandes et douces si les incises par petite entors qui te semble qu’ele soit en la maniere d’une fure; et
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if they are large and soft, cut them with a small incision in the manner of a furrow; andif the root is large and red, do not touch it with iron, also for the discharge of blood;si son rouges et li racine est petite si le metes sus un linge qui soit f
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	if they are red and the root is small, place it on a cloth that is folded in four, and leave it until it bursts, then you will separate it or it will burst by itself;et s’il est meurs et l’enflure dure, si le met
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is swollen and the swelling lasts, place it on a clean cloth, and if the abscess is white and the root fine, have the instrument for cauterizing ready, but first check that the abscess is calm and pacified.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then have the patient sit facing the sun, with his head in your lap, and open his mouth and press his tongue down towards all the instruments, from which this form is taken.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	and it should be made of silver or fine brass like a little knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	When you press the tongue against all this instrument, and see the abscess, take the needle and thread it through the almond, and draw it out above as much as you can;
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	and draw up some of the threads with it, then release the instrument, from which this form is taken, which looks like a forceps;
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	and its jaws are curved and one jaw is higher than the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel;
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument available, use a pair of tongs with the same shape:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And it has serrations on one side, and smooth on the other;
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and when you have finished with one of the testicles, then finish with the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with warm water, and water and garlic, and if there is bleeding, gargle the patient with water, or cooked pomegranate peels, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops.
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then dry it until it is healed;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	sometimes abscesses form in the throat other than the two testicles, so treat them just as the two testicles are treated.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, namely, one of small size;
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	and her throat was almost entirely closed off, so that the woman could not breathe through the passageway which was blocked, and she could not eat or drink, and would have died in one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess had grown so much that it had forced out two holes in the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I hastened therefore at once, and fixed one hook in his anus, then drew him out violently, and drew out a large portion of bowels.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	Then I inserted another hook into the other nostril, and I opened his mouth and pressed his tongue.
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	Afterwards, I inserted the hook into the abscesses, and scraped out a portion of it, and only a little blood came out violently.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	And thus the passage of the throat of the woman was cleared, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I did not cease to cut the abscess for a long time;
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	And the abscess grew again, filling up the place that I had emptied, until it became very large.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	Therefore I lanced and cauterized it within the throat:
ensi demora sens croistre;	Thus it stopped growing;
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I depart from these parts, and am but what God made of me after my departure.
de l’uve	from the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When there is swelling in the eye, and it is swollen and long, it is called 'perpendicular'.
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	And if it is below, large and round, then it is an 'eye'.
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it has been cleaned as we have said in the division, and the cleaning does not help, and you see that the eye is soothed and it is delicate, then you should cover it.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	And if it is round and assembled and not long,
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and it is bloody or of a pale colour or black, then you should avoid incision of it.Quant li sang se pieze par sanz et par veine, il se pieze si fort qu’il ne puet demorer en son leu;
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	When blood seeps through skin and vein, it seeps so strongly that it cannot stay in its place. Therefore, when you see this happening according to the manner I have described, in terms of its whiteness and length, you should have the patient sit facing the sun, and press his tongue against the instrument which we have mentioned earlier;
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	then insert the needle into the vein, and pull it through, and cut off one of the two strands that I mentioned in the incision of the two testicles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And you should not cut any more than the surplus which is beyond the natural boundary;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	because if you cut more, it harms the voice and speech;
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and after the incision, proceed as we have said in the incision of the two testicles, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear due to covering, then you should use the cautery of the sense of fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The manner of the cautery is for acute fever.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And the patient should put his head down into the healthy person's armpit, and then press his tongue against the instrument that we mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and spit it out with living hot saliva, neither too thick nor too clear;
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and use this instrument, of which there is a description below:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And it has a hair or thread on which to place the medicine, like the hairs of a spoon, and you place the instrument with all the medicine on the eye;
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	and the patient lies on his side so that saliva and mucus flow from his mouth due to the medicine, so that it does not go down into his throat and lungs;
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	then hold your hand over the medicine and press it onto the eye for about half an hour, until you see it swelling and the stinging of the medicine subsides;
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	and if you see that [the medicine] is drying out, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument completely into the cotton onto the eye;
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	and do this often until the cautery is complete, then let it dry and fall off after 4 or 5 days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you need to renew the fire cautery, then renew it, and after the cautery wipe around the eye with cotton dipped in butter, and cleanse what is around the medicine.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let there be washing with cold water, and let there be gargling until it heals.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This treatment is safer than incision or cauterization.
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	If it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take calendula and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and wormwood and similar herbs, and mix them all or some of them in a pot, and add garlic, and let it boil.
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	And let the pot be well glazed with strong clay, and place the pot over the heat source in this way:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And let it be of silver or bronze, and let one of the patient's eyes be closed with a cloth over their mouth so that the vapors rise to the eye through the nostril until the eye is numbed.
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	afterwards he often repeats it, until the vein dries up, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the occurrence of a hot abscess, because many things happen;
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and do not do this until the end of the hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not available, take a needle and put an egg yolk inside the tip, so that the mouth on the patient is not too hot;
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	because the egg yolk does not let the steam harm the mouth, and it is a healthy remedy together.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Many times there is a bone or spine of a fish or something else stuck in the throat;
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	so you should pull out what you can see, and press the tongue against the instrument in the sun until you see the object move;
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	and what does not come out and is stuck in the throat, you should make the patient vomit so that the meat is cooked in the stomach;
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	by chance if the thing turns out to be bad through vomiting;
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of turnip, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and tie the thread to the sponge and then swallow it;
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when it reaches the spot, it will stick there, and then you can pull it out;
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it doesn't come out as we have said, then take the instrument of salt according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And let the instrument be curved at the tip so that it can enter the throat more easily, and have the tip raised up high;
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, or he will choke, nor push anything into the bones inside;
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	and it is better that the patient spits out the instrument when he vomits, so that the thing comes out;
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	if the bowels move downward, or he draws them outward with all his strength, until they are drawn out.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the blood of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	Sometimes the blood is let, as I have said in the previous chapter, by the use of medicines.
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	And if that does not help, then look into the throat of the patient in the sunlight, and press his tongue with the instrument I told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the blood, draw it out with a small hook, or with fine tweezers that are fit for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, take a curved cane, and put it into the throat of the sick person, then put on the curve of the cane hot iron, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient has a fever all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	Then take some cold water in a glass, open the mouth, and pour it in without swallowing it, moving it around with his hand frequently;
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	and as soon as the blood feels the water, let it flow out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if it does not flow out as we have said, then smoke the patient with assafetida, using the instrument I described in the section on smoking the throat;
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	do this many times, for it will come out without hurting him.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the way of fuming is that you put charcoal in a pot, and the bottom is covered with a perforated lid, and through that hole the pipe is inserted.
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	Then you pour in the smoke, and the patient puts the mouth of the tube in his mouth, closing it so that no smoke escapes, but goes right into the blood.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	And now the blood will flow down, and if it does not, resume the fuming repeatedly.
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	And let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty things, and do not drink water;
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	and then it will be necessary that she go out by this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the form of the instrument used to draw blood is, when one can see it, like curved tweezers that are bent in order to enter the throat;
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	and has the appearance of a sow's mouth, and it has the roughness of limy earth, so that whomever it bites, it cannot let go;
et vez ci la forme:	and here is the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	Mouths that resemble abscesses are, according to what the memory comes later from one and another in this book, and they differ in penetration and size;
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	and there are two ways this happens, either through its own appearance or because of moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for the places where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundations, and the abscesses of fleshy places are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if an abscess should not be punctured until the pus is mature according to its completion;
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	and some should be punctured when they are crusty and won't die according to their completion, like abscesses near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	Because when abscesses come from these joints, and one lets them be as long as they are swollen around the edge, perhaps the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, by which that is caused to contract in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	When the abscess is near the main limb, and you delay the puncturing until it is mature, it will harm the main limb;
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	or if it's near the fundament, it should be punctured as soon as it's mature;
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	and you should not puncture a crusty abscess without digestion being complete, except for one near the fundament, or it may burst inside and cause a fistula;
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and cannot heal for a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And you should know the time of piercing the abscess which is dead, according to its development, and that is when the pain has subsided, and the departure of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and the softening and hardening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	and you should make the piercing where the abscess is most dependent, and where it appears soft;
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and the piercing should be made where it is longest in the body; and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints, and near nerves and arteries, and in all places where there are no folds.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those who are bent, according to the affected member.Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to leave the puncture until it is confirmed by completed digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce it first, the body will be filled with venom from it, and it is full of filth;
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and by chance harden the lips and his depths.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And for any abscess that is punctured according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And you must treat with small abscesses, small holes;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in large abscesses, large holes, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess;
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if it has such abscesses where one must cut into the brain, and cover;
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	when it has become as thin as a cloth, and is dead, then one must do as one does with blisters:
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	and if there are such that split into three angles, and if there are any that one covers as the pouch of a myrtle berry, just like abscesses of the fingernails;
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and if there are any where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar covers.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those that have no head, like a superficial blister, you must pierce fully;
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	and when the abscess is large, and he has a great swelling, and you pierce it, do not draw out all of the pus in that hour but only a part.
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	then pack the abscess until the next day, then draw out something again.
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	do this many times from great to greater, until all of the pus has come out.
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	especially if the patient is weak in strength, or a woman carrying child, or a small child, or an old and feeble man.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the pus may sometimes spurt out with the opening of the boil, and the patient might die from it, and you would not realize it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Therefore, be very cautious when performing this chapter, and when you have pierced the abscess, wash the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small;
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	and if it is a clean cut, then apply bandages of linen or old cotton;
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	and if it is a large abscess with many openings, then you must put in each opening a tent so that they come one against the other;
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have seared it all around, then you must fill it with old cotton or linen rags without moisture, and let it lie until the third day;
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then plaster it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if blood flow occurs due to your work, administer cold water and vinegar, and moisten the cloth, and place it over the flowing area many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the flow of blood persists, and they administer management and treatment, and the powders that I have described in this book in earlier chapters, and if it is during the winter, and the location of the abscesses is very sensitive, then you should apply hot wine-and-oil-soaked tents and cloths;
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	and if it is in the summer, and the location is fleshy, then you should apply moist cloths soaked in water and oil, or cool wine and oil, for up to a third of a day, as we have said;
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then loosen the abscess, wash it, and treat it as needed until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And it is necessary to understand generally in the treatment of abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	I have told you how one should go about treating abscesses, and now see the chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	From the head come small abscesses, and they are caused by us being in fabrics, like the goiter on a goose's neck, and there are many variations of them.Et si li chief est hote, et li leus ou li aposteme est hote, si covient que tu mettes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue fraiche, jusc’au tier jor; puis deslie l’aposteme, essue li leus, et cure-le si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are some that are fatty and others that contain pus and moisture;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	and some are hard and stony in texture, and there is no doubt if the artery does not cause issues.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the abdomen is that you must examine all instruments called "endoscopies", from which the form comes later, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, they will cut it from above.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture has been drained, one should scrape it without leaving anything behind that contains the moisture, because it will return if you leave anything behind.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	Then plunge cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	if not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound and leave it until the next day;
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	and those who are detained at night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then resume the cotton, as before, on the second and third days, until you are sure that it does not stay overnight;
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal the wound with an appropriate ointment, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscess contains pus, then open it according to this method, from the length;
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	and cut your fingernails, and scrape off all the scabs, and put all your ointment to draw out pus from under the skin where it lies;
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	and if the artery pulsates inwards, then do what I told you after this.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also treat an abscess if it is stone-like, and cut and treat it as I have told you.Si li artere clent, si la traie fuer l’aposteme sus la cotte, tant que li sang ne s’en poie; et si le sang est gras, si met sel et vinyer, et remue li cot ains qu’il s’escanse, et distrai li sang; et se li sang ne s’escante pas, si traie li cot ou il gist sus l’aposteme, tant qu’il s’escanse par le siel de li cotte.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the incision on the pus-filled, moist abscess is lighter, because there is less blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if any of these abscesses on the head do not contain pus, and they were the abscesses that I described on the head of an old woman;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and I found the abscess just like a hard stone, rough and white, and could not be broken;
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if one had done it, they would have hurt themselves as much as with a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	For other abscesses coming from the head, especially those that come to the heads of children and to the roots of the ears, the opening should be in the highest and most dependent place so that the pus can flow out.
et les cure si com il covient.	and treat them as they should be.
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times abscesses occur in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come elsewhere in the body, and they are large, and some are connected with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each scrofula is properly within its coat, like the nodos and the abscess of the head, as we have said;
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and there are many similarities among these scrofulas.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are some that do not obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	In that one therefore which you see of good disposition to touch, and is similar in color to the body, and has no noise in any part and is not cold to the nerves of the neck or to the artery or the channel, and is not deep;
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	you should cut it from above, and scrape each part, and the two lips of the heart are hooked, if you have need, as we have said in abscesses of the head;
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	and draw it little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, nor the artery or the tendons, that the hand does not escape, and do not look too far ahead, lest you cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it will not let you work, put into the wound vitriol powder, or some powders that stem blood flow, and close the wound.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	and leave it until the abscesses are soothed and the wound softens and begins to heal.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the bleeding has stopped, return to your work until you complete it.
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	Then examine with your finger if there are any small scrofulous bumps left, and cut them out and clean the wound.Et si li sans revien, si prends une fiaunce eune espine de rose, ou un peigne, et la mete en la voinne, qu’
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if there is in the root of the scrofula a large vein, you should not cut that scrofula at its root, but ligature it with a strong double thread, and let it fall without harm.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	Then dress the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut around the entire scrofula, then you should bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them up now, since there is no longer any surplus due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	you should proceed to cut around the root of it and pull it out, then sew it up as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those scrofulae which have an abundance of pus, pierce there where the pus flows out;
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	and pierce it thus as previously mentioned, so that the pus may flow out; then apply tenting with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption;
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when the wound is clean, then cure it with ointment mixed with chalk, until it is healed.
de squinance	of scrofula
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancients spoke of the cutting of the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I have never seen it done in our land, and it is written in their books.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those with squint, the fold of the throat called the "epiglottis" should be cut.
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	and one does not make an incision through it, because all the veins and the portal of the disease are in those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat or in the armpits.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the windpipe, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the danger that comes from strangulation.Si li maladie est en la gorge, il covient que tu fendures la gorge et li pormon dou costé, car il ne peut aler si non.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, we should cut it under the two circles or four, a small slit across, between the two circles, or according to the amount of the slit in the soft palate; not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and those places where it is suitable to cut the epiglottis so that there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long from there.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the teacher is fearful, then he must stretch the skin of the throat to the very edge, then cut the skin until he reaches the cartilage;
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	and avoid the blood vessels if you see anything, and then cover the wound, as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated through the section of the throat where the jugular vein emerges from the broken place, and by the deficiency in voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open a little.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour has passed that we doubt of strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound in the neck and close it all firmly without the cartilage.
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then administer remedies that promote the formation of flesh, until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim says one should not do this until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient judged dead, and the lack of breath evident.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then cover the epiglottis so that the patient cannot choke and can breathe through the wound, and thus is protected from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And so the ancients commanded that the wound be left open until the evil of the disease had passed and it is passed in three or four days. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and to treat it, until it was healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a lady take a knife and stab herself in the throat, cutting some of the windpipe;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called to heal her, and found her as good as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound and found that blood had issued from it, and I judged that she had not coughed up any blood or vomited anything other than through her throat, and the blood was coming out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and healed her so that she recovered;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and the lady had no mark left but a scar on her throat, and returned afterward to her senses;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	therefore I say that one should have no fear in cutting the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This kind of abscess is called a "gorge hernia", and it is a large abscess the color of yew wood, and occurs often in women;
et est selonc II manieres:	and there are two kinds:
naturez, et accidens;	natural and accidental;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	the natural kind has no opening.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidents occur in two ways, one of which is similar to a cyst, and the other way is like an abscess that comes from an artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is fear, and one should not operate by force except in the case of a small one, and test and probe at all the orifices:
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it as hard as a cyst, and it cannot be opened by any means, then cut it, as one cuts a cyst, and treat it throughout its entire coat, if there is no pus;
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and examine it thoroughly, and treat it as it should be, until it is completely healed.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many types of cysts, all of which I will describe their similarities:
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and now I will explain the difference between a cyst and an abscess.A cyst is a hard lump that does not open easily, while an issue is soft and can be opened with a needle.The
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that a discharge is heat and feverishness while the ebullition passes, and the swelling is completed.
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	therefore, rest the fever and the heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the nut there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains a pus-filled sac that is colored according to the body's color, and begins like a jaw, and becomes swollen;
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they are according to two appearances: some are dry and others moist, and many colors exist as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the pustule, that you examine and inquire into it first with all the instruments called "entromissoires", according to what its form will allow, as described in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of inquiry for abscesses on the head is that you press in the moistest place that you find in the abscess and move your fingers slowly little by little until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then pull out the instrument and take care in what goes out.Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes qui sont selonc la chair, ou le corps si soit en grand dolor, est qu’on
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the moisture runs short, no matter what color it is, treat it as I have said for other abscesses.
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And if no moisture comes out after the incision, know that it is fatty, so do it in a cross pattern and pick it up with tweezers and lightly scrape each side, and guard the skin where it lies, so that you draw it healthy with the nail.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot draw it healthy, then draw it in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything remains, it will return to the body many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if a little remains, and the pain troubles you, then employ some corrosive powders on the wound, and constrict the wound, and put warm poultices on it, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if it is large, then cut the two lips of the wound, and clean out that which is rotten flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	and if the pulsing vein is against you or any other, then hasten and apply ground glass, and leave it for two or three days, until the wound suppurates and the bleeding subsides.
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	then return to covering that which has been left bare.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	Behold the forms of the intruding instruments, and there are three types:
grans et moien et petit;	large, medium, and small;and se li estrumen n’a pas la figure en
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	 instrument is not shaped in , and there are three parts which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three types:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistulas;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	are also like the needles used to sew sorcerers, and are made of copper, iron, or silver; those that are yellow in color are more effective, and are best tested with black pitch to surround the curves of a fistula.
et sont de III manieres:	There are three types:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the opening.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The shapes of the hooks are very similar, as you can see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	large, medium, and small;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and there are hooks with two curves in three ways also;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and there are hooks with three curves, and they are also of three types;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and there are hooks with two curves, and hooks with one curve only, and they are of three types;
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The heads of these tools are sharp, and some only cut one side, which they use to shave the skin, so that they do not cut the vein or nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and for these probes are handles wrapped in cloth so that the patient does not injure themselves when opening abscesses.
et sont de III manieres:	There are three types of them:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	large, small, and medium, as you can see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and they are only used in fleshy places, like legs, arms, breasts, and armpits, and similar places.
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and sometimes a small tool is made, resembling a pair of tweezers, according to this form, with which blood is stopped.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and sometimes it is placed in the place that heals by opening veins and arteries, and sometimes they are bound according to this large form;
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen when they become corrupted, so that they resemble women's breasts.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and remain unsightly and swollen; and if anyone wishes to cure them, then one must cauterize according to the form of this line .b. up to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scorch the fat, and fill the wound with ointment, then close the two lips of the wound by sewing, and let it heal.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	and if the breast sags downward, and becomes soft because of its size, as happens to women, then they should make two slits above, like two similar incisions;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	one of which is attached to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to line .g.;et tant com il y ad de graisse, escorche la; si qu’ele soit sanee, et le mamele reposit en son leu;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then scald the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitches and powders, and what is necessary for the treatment, until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood flow, you should fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Let it sit until it absorbs the remainder of the fat, then clean it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses which come under the armpits are types of hard scrofula where there are nodules, and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bowels which are in the abscess have been emptied, employ the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton and treat it with appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is of the appearance of scrofula, they should proceed as we have said in slits for scrofula; and if the wound becomes swollen, they should apply cauterization as we have said previously.Et se li apostemes est desoz le col ou desoz les asseles, si covient que il soit fendu a la radice selonc la ligne m. jusc’a la ligne .g., car en cest lieu il conviens que il soit fenduz selonc la ligne de la nature.
de la routure de l’artere	on the rot of an artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When an artery is cut and the skin above is sewn together, it often leads to abscesses, and likewise, the vein becomes swollen and abscessed.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	And if one knows this is due to an artery, the abscesses are long and deep.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	and when you feel it with your fingers, you will feel the dislocation;
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when it is in the vein, there is a visible swelling;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is foolish to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the armpit and in the groin and neck and many other places, for it is large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore, one should avoid cauterizing with iron, and if it is on the head, then that should also be avoided, and for the one who has inflammation of an artery under the skin, a slit should be made through the skin above it;
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then cut through the flesh with a sharp knife, and carefully separate the artery from the veins, until it is exposed;et puis oevre la cure de fer par le chief ou il est desoz.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	then cauterize the head where it is under. Then push a needle underneath and pierce through to the other side, and compress the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I taught you about extracting the two arteries in the temples;et qu’ele soit bien serree, et que les II perces soient bien coperies, si qu’ele ne se pueda desoufrer.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	then point the area between the two ligatures of an introducer so that the pus flows out and the abscess is drained.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then administer the treatment that causes bleeding, until the ligature falls off.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat with an ointment suitable for this, until it is healed.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	and if the abscess is due to an incised wound, you should dye your hand with something that you can get from the abscess all over the skin, then pierce it with a needle held in your hand, and thread a double piece of thread through it, so that you can pull it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	then tie the abscess, as I told you, with one of the two parts of the thread on each shoulder;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	and if you fear that the thread might come undone, pierce another needle with the entire thread all through the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tighten the thread in four places.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then scrape the abscess until the pus comes out, then scrape the pus from the wound and leave what is attached.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then place a wet cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then administer poultices and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, as abscesses come in the arteries and veins, they come to the nerves when they are wounded, or from too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this happens more often at the shoulders and elbows and in all joints where there are pustules, and it has the colour of the body, and is in various states without pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when one presses it hard, the patient feels pain, and it is not deep in the body but under the skin.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	And it moves in no way, neither forward nor backward, down or up, and the one that is in joints should not be cauterized with iron.
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	Perhaps there might be contraction.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And those who are on the head or forehead, use the spatulum.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and squeeze it at its base.
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For a larger one, pierce it with a needle and drain it, then cut it open, remove the pus, and sew up the wound to heal.
des grosses boces pendans	large bumps hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	Sometimes it occurs in bellies and nowhere else; this disease is called "fungus" due to its resemblance to a mushroom, with thin roots and thick leaves.
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	There are both small and very large ones.
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	I saw a man with two in his belly that looked more like mushrooms than anything else; they had no difference, were white, had thin roots, and moist fluid ran from them.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I cut them open and found one weighing 18 ounces and the other 6 ounces; the procedure for incising is such that you observe if the disease is moist, and the armpit is white, moist, and has thin roots.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	If the lump is large, apply the spatula widely, and have the fire cautery ready in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For often there are excessive bloodlettings when cutting, and if the blood flows too much, then quickly use the cautery.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	And if you see the patient is terrified and fearful of the iron incision, take a well-prepared thread and tie it around the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	Then release it, and keep tying and untieing the thread around the joint without causing pain until the lump is cut through.
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	And if the roots are thick, then fearlessly cut through them for the belly, but you can cut through half of it and cauterize it so that it does not return.
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then treat the wound, and be careful not to cut into the yellow part of the skin which is of poor quality and milky in appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of cancer next.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil bursts
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of a hernia comes from cauterization of a wound or fissure in a syphilitic ulcer, and it is on the abdomen and in some of the bowels, as happens in other diseases, or from blood flowing from veins or arteries according to what is mentioned above, or from flatulence;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it is from the disease of syphilis and an exit from the bowel, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a minor issue without pain, and it opens in various ways.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then it is more varied; and when one presses it with their hands, it retreats, and then comes back out, and sometimes it is blocked, and increases significantly at the entrance of the bath and with intense effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it's due to moisture, it's a minor issue, and it opens well when you press it with your hand, and it doesn't constrict.Et se li color est plus fonc que la color dou cors, et n’est pas sens dolor, si est legiere chose, et s’il cort de vo
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if the color is darker than the body's color, and there's no pain, then it's a minor issue, and if it's due to blood, then the abscesses open in various ways: large and hard, and they are fixed according to their size.Et se li aposteme cort de voine
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is due to wind, then it is soft in the touch, and the actions are such that you observe whether the appearance is due to blood from the artery or vein, or wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	Then you must let it heal.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, because of the artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestines or bowels, then you must instruct the patient to tighten his abdomen and hold it straight, then sign around the belly;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then command him to lie down soon between your hands, then go around the area you have signed all around the belly; then let half of the abscess rise up above at the great knuckle;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then tie it tightly with a strong thread or a strong silk cord firmly, and let the pus be completely discharged;
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then cut through half of the swollen abscess above the tie, and push your index finger in, and feel for the intestines;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you remove it from the string, then untie it, and stuff the intestine back into the abdomen.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find the bowel, take it at the anus, and cut off the excess;
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery makes you dizzy or the vein, then go around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and thread them with strong thread, and pierce through what you have done in a cross that you are making.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then pull the abscess in four places over the needles, and if you see that the needles are pulling out, remove the needles and let it drain until it can no longer, and cut off the dead flesh by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	Or you can cut it when it is thin and draining, then clean the wound as needed, and close up the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and draw out the blood or moisture which you find, then cure the place as it should be, and close up the wound.
dou chancre	from sores
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have described in the section on ulcers the various types of ulcer, how to treat them with medicine, and how to avoid using iron in the treatment.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	And we say that when an ulcer is found in the body, great care must be taken in its treatment, and the ancients say that when ulcers are in places where they can be reached by scraping, as in breasts, armpits, and similar places, they should all be removed when first discovered.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	And when they are large and old, you must not approach them at all, for I have never seen any healed from such.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	None have ever been healed before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And the treatment when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is to sometimes draw out the disease with black bile.
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	then make him vomit if he shows signs of fullness, then loosen the patient's clothes to prepare for the operation;
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	then wash your hands and face, and the patient's head and body, leaving nothing untouched;
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and let the blood flow freely, and squeeze well the area in your hand or with something else, and if the bleeding from the incision of the artery or vein is not stopped by cauterization, then stop it by tying it off;
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal another wound until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have already discussed in the division the various types of dropsy, and how the accumulation of fluid is caused, and the signs of each type, and how it is treated with medicine, and also by iron.
si est eclites soulement;	if it is only swollen:
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one must not touch with iron in these two cases:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	that is to say, tympanitis and hypothermia, for they are deadly;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	therefore when you treat this appearance of dropsy called by doctors 'ectrotus', and the treatment does not help, look to see if the patient is weak, or if they have another illness besides dropsy, such as a fever and stomach pain and similar things;
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	do not touch them with iron, for there is doubt;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	and if you see the patient very strong, and they have no other illness except dropsy, and they are not too young or too old, then you must do this;
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	let the patient lie down on his back, and press his belly upwards to force out the water to the lowest part of the feet, then take the spatulum and pierce according to this form;
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And cut into two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	at the tip, and yet not so sharp that it can pierce through to the intestines when pushed in, and not cause bleeding;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	then examine whether the dropsy is pressing on the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	if you should split open under the armpit three fingers' width straight below the armpit;
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	and if the dropsy is due to disease of the liver, then your split should be on the left side of the armpit three fingers' width;
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	and if it is due to the spleen, then on the right, and the patient must not lie on the split so that the excess fluids do not flow to that weak spot;
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	then pierce all the way through to the instrument, and stop, and lift your hand to the entire spongy area between the skin and the syringe as much as when skinning in an amount equal to a fingernail or so;
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	then pierce the ulcer until the pus comes to the surface, and this is the color of the pus, then draw it out, and insert this instrument of which this is the shape:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it resembles a slender silver rod, and is made of thin copper or light brass, and has at the end below a small hole:
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and on one side there are three holes:
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and two on the other side, and one on the other;
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes make in feathers:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	at the top is the eye, so that when the instrument reaches the pus, it will drain right into the instrument;
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	drain off half or a third of it, for if you drain more than is proper in that hour, the patient may die from the loss of his life-fluids, or he will faint, or he will approach death;
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the disease indicate, and his pulses;
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	then treat the instrument and retain the water, which is now retained by the clot that blocks the orifice above the cyst, about which I have spoken, piercing it according to this method:
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	then recommence with the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering from it, and treat a small quantity of water;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	do this every day, and beware of following it as long as there is any water left but only a little.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave it with a lot of water, then treat with hot sand or ash, and with much sweating or bathing and in the sun, and drink some wine;
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	and treat with astringent medicines until he is healed, and cauterize the stomach and liver and spleen after the extraction of the pus, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the swelling of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born without an opening on their penis, or the opening is small and not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If necessary, one must pierce it with a very fine instrument according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	then put a plug of cotton in the urethra and tie it and leave it for 3 to 4 days, and when he wants to urinate, remove the plug and let him urinate, then replace the plug.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	and perhaps this is unnecessary because the urine that comes out does not allow it to stay closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those whose passages are narrow, if they are medicated with a plug of wool, as we have said, will widen.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have an opening in their place are constipated, for some are born with the opening at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis upward.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	and cannot ejaculate because the material cannot reach the penis, and this is a serious condition.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the way to do this is for the patient to lie on his back, then cut off the top of the penis and foreskin, as well as some of the shaft, so that the hole is in the middle, as it should be.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And beware of bleeding which often occurs, and if it does, then stanch the blood with something that stanches blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Many times this albarth comes on the penis, and it is an ugly appearance of flesh;it has a round shape like a testicle, and sometimes it goes away by itself, and sometimes not.if it happens in a woman's breast
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	And there are both malignant and non-malignant ones;the one that is on the penis, if it is large and
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	you must grab them with tweezers very gently, and cut and clean them all, then place wet cotton in Egyptian ointment on top of them.
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat with the ointment diafinicon until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, discolored and foul-smelling, then you must apply cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have copped it, and if the wound is on the shaft of the penis, with part inside and part outside, then you must first remove the albata that is inside.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	And when it is sutured, treat the part that is outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	Because when you treat it all at once, the skin of the penis is not secured so that it does not pierce, and blackness and corruption come to it in its shaft and scrotum.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary to cut away all that is black and corrupted, then lay on the plaster made of honey and flour from pomegranate peels and nuts, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if there is bleeding, apply the lunar cautery as follows:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	Cauteries have two uses together: l’un est pour eschauffer le membre et delivre li sang et la
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	that is to say, with the flow of blood, and corruption;
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	and if the head of the penis is damaged and withdrawn, then you should insert a tube into the penis and the patient should urinate through it.
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	and when the foreskin is torn at the head of the penis, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, whether due to a wound or an abscess, then you must cut it with instruments until all the skin is removed and the head of the penis is relieved of all parts;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	and if it is difficult to discuss this, then you should cut it with some sharp instrument at the tip of the penis and under the foreskin;
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	then separate them gently, and place a thin damp linen cloth in the water until it is cold, so that it does not tear again.
de la circoncision	On circumcision:
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not a dislocation of continuity like other wounds.
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Nevertheless, when we do this work of our own free will, and properly to children, it is necessary that we do the best and lightest work for their salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have no more than what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I have seen most of the masters and surgeons who made circumcision all around, and on adults, and on everyone, a new knife.
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	It was the cure because there were two membranes, and by chance one above and the other below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	Now they heal it, covering it, and there is twice as much pain, and in the purification which is due to the wound of the member is not assured its tip.And the member does not look like what it should be, and the wound has a foul smell.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	And in the purification of the nail, perhaps the iron escapes and spoils the work, and many times they grow without needing purification, and I have seen this happen.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the cleaning that is done to the foreskin all over the thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut justly above as below.Or li fuit li doler qui tailla l’ungle, si doit il le tailler par fin et non pas par costé, car par fin il ne se peult mander; si doit il estre tailli par costé, et il faut qu’il soit tailli tant qu’il eschieve la chair.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, you cut equally throughout its entire length.
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but the thread must be well-tied around the skin;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and the method of the first operation is such that you cause the child to think, if he understands, that you are only tying the thread around his penis, and then let him urinate in every way that he can;
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	then hold it upright between your hands, and tie the threads tightly between your hands or under your feet so that neither the child nor any of the instruments can see them;
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	then put your hand over the penis and breathe or blow on it, and pull it upwards until the head of the penis is drawn out;
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	then cleanse it well of the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the wound with a double thread, and then tie it underneath again with another thread;
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and hold it with the second finger in the pouch and the index finger on top, then press between the two fingers, then lift the heart upward violently and pull the head of the penis;
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	then let the blood flow a little at a time, for that is the cure;
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put powder on top of the powder a layer of cooked egg white tempered with rose water, confited in good and fresh rosemary oil, and leave it on until the next day, then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The form of the force for purification is as follows:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	the two shoulders should be thin and sharp, and the shoulders as wide as the arm equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	the error of purification is when the heart inside moves during the incision;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	therefore you must stretch it with your nail so that the skin makes an abscess;
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	and the scalp likewise, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, hold it with tweezers, and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if they persist for three days, and what is under the foreskin is swollen, let it be until the abscess has drained and the skin has healed slightly;
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	and cut it as you can, and beware of the part of the foreskin, it will not harm him at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Therefore, cure the place of the sore with powder, as we have said in the treatise on powders, and if they cut the foreskin excessively, and it goes above, it will not harm;et se li apostemes se part a deux ou a III, et sont en la verge, si le laisse tant qu’il soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement, et cure le lieu.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the abscess splits into two or three, and they are on the foreskin, let it be until it is drained and the skin has healed slightly, and cure the place. Cure it therefore as we
dou retenement de l’urine	from the retention of urine:
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is due to a stone, or frozen blood, or a tumor, or a birth mark, or similar things that we have mentioned in the classification.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	And if the urine is not released, and you see that it is retained by a stone which is in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent over at the knees:
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	And have his feet placed on his back, and extend his belly from above his back, and the patient should hold his breath as hard as he can;
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And thus the neck of the bladder is pressed from above to push out the stone, and so the urine flows;
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	And if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must perform an extraction using an instrument called a "syringe", which is made thus:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and have fine, light silver threads, like a bird's feathers;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and the needle should be about a palm and a half long, with a thin point.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the method for urinary problems is to take a doubled thread, tie some wool or cotton at its tip, and insert the tip of the thread into the syringe;
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and twist the excess wool, then fill the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and have the patient sit on a seat, and anoint the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water;
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the body;
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	then fill the syringe until the bladder, and feel the patient come to the empty place, and it is not done according to this order because the person who guides where she goes is wrong.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	then they stretch the thread all along the wool little by little, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out, and let the urine flow.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and use the syringe again until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scabs or blood comes into the bladder, or pus is accumulated there, and you see it distilling with water and medicine, then do all the instrument that is called "clepsydra", and that is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It is closed, and has three openings:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	Two on one side, and one on the other, as you can see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	and the hair-like channels through which the medicinal cort should pass so that it blocks the penis without addition, and one can draw out moisture and push in when necessary;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	and when you see your medicines enter the bladder, put the tip of the syringe into the moisture, and draw while pushing the plunger in.
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	if you will draw out the moisture from the chest, and then strongly bind it up again;
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	if the moisture enters into him, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	and this is the form of the subtle enema with which one enemas the bladder:
si est ci:	if it is here:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And it is made of silver or copper, and the head is higher;
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and below has the breast or the intestines;
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture in it which you want to use for the enema, then tie it between the two breasts shaped like a ball, and heat the pouch over the fire;
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	then insert the head of the enema into the penis, then squeeze your hand on the bladder gently until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle out of it, and pierce it all around evenly;
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	then thread a strong wire through these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a jug, and put inside whatever you wish of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument;
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and do as you did with the bladder, pressing by hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have already said in the division of the stones, and their extraction together with remedies;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	and I have said the difference between a stone lodged in the urethra, and all the signs, and in what kind of stone one should operate with cutting;
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder, and in the penis;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder occurs more often in children, and it is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder like water in its subtlety;
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and it opens the urethra, and hurts the patient's penis, and he pees many times, and then it blocks up;
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and in many of these cases the foundations (kidneys?) are affected;
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and the cure is easy for children until they are four years old, but it is severe in the elderly, and it falls in between youth and old age;
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	and the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema to draw out all the feces that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	Because it sometimes clogs up when seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the feet, lift him up and shake him from side to side, so that the stone descends into the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it comes out from above;
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	then have him sit between your hands, his hands beneath his thighs so that his bladder is completely slanting downward;
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	then feel and touch it inside;
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	if you feel the stone in the space, then hurry to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not come out with just the touch, then moisten your index finger of your left hand with oil, if the patient is an adult, or your middle finger if the patient is young;
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	and insert it into his anus, and feel for the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, push it towards the neck of the bladder;
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	then press on your finger, and push the stone to where you want to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and to extend the testicles upwards with his right hand, and with his left hand to pull back the skin beneath the testicles in the area where the incision is made;
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	then he cuts the wart, and the spatomyle [i.e., spatulum] cuts it, from which this is the shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	and they cut between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the navel;
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	and it is straight on the stone, and both are on the anus, and the incision is diagonal so that it is wide at the top and narrow at the bottom, according to the size of the stone, not too large;
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	by chance the pressure on the anus, the two testicles jump out without effort;
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	and know that there is such a stone with angles and edges;
si est griés a issir;	if it grinds to come out;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	and if there is one underneath, similar to a grape, and round, from which the passage is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	To these therefore where there are angles and edges, make the incision larger;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	and if it does not come out, then you must grip it with tongs which are like a file at the tip, to extract the stone so that it does not slip away;
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	or you might push under the instrument a thin, curved hook;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you cannot catch it in that way, then widen the hole and if the blood is oozing, stanch it with vitriol;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	and if there is more than one stone, then push the largest first into the neck of the bladder, then press upwards, and draw it out, and the smaller ones after, if there are several.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then it must be sutured, and a larger wound made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things can happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	either he dies or the urine comes out again through the hole where the skin cannot heal;
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but nevertheless try to draw it out with tweezers, until you have pulled it out piece by piece.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	And when you have finished your work, then apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it tightly, and put on top a damp cloth wet in oil and wine, or in oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess.
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	Then reseat the dislocation on his neck, and don't loosen the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, wash the site well with oil and water, then treat the wound with thin ointment and thick ointment until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if hot abscesses and scorched wounds come in the wound, and congealed blood in the bladder, and the urine is retained because of this, known to be in such a way that it comes out with the urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	then pour boiling water into the wound, and draw out this blood, for if it remains, then the bladder will be damaged and burst.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then raise the wound with vinegar, garlic and salt, and aid him in every way you know until he is healed.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And it is necessary that during all the hours you treat him, you bind his two thighs together and apply remedies to the affected area.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	If the stone is small, and it is lodged in the ureter, and pierced through, and the urine cannot pass through;
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	if after performing what I have described, you cut him many times, then you are excused from cutting any further by this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proven this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take a piece of iron according to this shape and let it be pointed at three angles and fixed in a brand:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	Then take a thread and tie it around the penis under the stone so that it cannot move back into the bladder;
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	then push the rod gently into the penis until it reaches the stone;
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	and twist the rod in your hand inside the stone a little at a time until you pierce the stone from another side;
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	then immediately the urine will come; press your hand against what is retained of the stone that is within the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	If it is broken at once and flies out with the urine, then the patient is healed.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	And if you cannot do this for any reason that divides it, then tie a string under the stone and another above it, then make an incision in the penis between the two strings, then pull it out, and untie the string, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of women's stone
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	Sometimes stones can get lodged in women's urethras, and if this happens, the treatment is difficult due to three factors:First, it is difficult to find the stone because of the narrowness of the passage; second, it is hard to extract without breaking it; and third, it is challenging to cure the resulting wound.Or qu’il n’i aie pas de sang con
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	one possibility is that the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	and the second is that one cannot find a well-known woman who reveals herself to suitors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third possibility is that one cannot find a well-known woman skilled in this art of handiwork;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	And the fourth possibility is that the woman's stone is deeper than the man's, so one must make a deeper incision, and there is great danger in it. And if necessity demands it, you should take a skilled midwife, and with difficulty she will find out about it, and if you cannot find such a midwife, do not desire a chaste one;
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	and present her with a wise old woman who is experienced in the lives of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and instruct her to do what you instruct her about the examination of the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and look very carefully to see if the woman is a virgin;
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then he must push his finger into her vagina and feel for the stone;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she finds it, then she should hold it under her finger, and he instructs her to push her finger into the wound and press her left hand firmly against her bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	If she finds it, then she must move the stone from the entrance of the bladder all the way down to the root of the thigh;
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	then she should push on the stone in the root of the thigh towards the middle of the vagina, where it is most sensitive; and feel for the stone in that area.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and not move her finger above or below the stone, but let the incision be small at first;
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	then widen the incision if you feel the stone is sharp, cutting the wound so that the stone can come out; and know that there are many types of stones:
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	this is to say, small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and which have hairs.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know their appearances in order to understand where they come from.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if the blood flows, put powdered vitriol in place, and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops.
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	Then return to your task, until the stone is out, and have ready the instruments I told you about for extracting stones, with men to assist you in your work.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	And if the blood flows and it is an artery that is cut, put powder on the spot and hold it with bandages and dressings, and do not release it again, but leave the stone and do not try to pull it out, or the patient may die.
puis cure la plaie.	Then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the pulse has returned to normal, return to your work until the stone is out.
de hernie carnouse	of carnous hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Red water is nothing other than an assemblage of moisture or white albumen, which is found under the shell of eggs.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	and is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly in the web of the egg, if one thinks that it is another egg;
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	and this is the skin of the scrotum between the white sac that we have described;
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	and this does not happen often.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the cause of this disease is weakness which comes to the testicles, and that matter is spread.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture has many colors:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	or it is a declining yellow color, or it is red, or black, or watery white, and there are more variations;
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs to recognize this condition; for if it is in the white sac that we have described, then it is a reasonable abscess, a long poultice as large as an egg, and it does not open the scrotum, for there is moisture all around it.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if it has moisture in the web itself, then it is an abscess with a part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it is another egg;
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white sac, he feels good;
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, test all over the area, because the shape is in front.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, then, what comes after the intrusion, judge what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healed according to his strength and the fullness of his body;
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	then lie on his back on something slightly raised and put a lot of blankets under him;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	then sit on his left, and instruct the assistant to sit on his right, and extend the testicle to one of the two sides of the heart;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the lit spatulum and cut the skin of the testicles between them from the long end to the scrotum, and make the incision straight while cutting the skin of the testicles up to the white sac, and carefully remove the skin according to your strength;
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	then pierce the abscess with a sharp knife to a large opening, and draw out all the pus, then put your fingers in, and press the abscess upwards.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the core of the bones, but only the abscess.
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	cut it all around or in parts very carefully, and make sure to cut deeply, for if you do not cut deeply, the pus will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	and if the egg white comes out during your work, then reset it in its place once you have finished working on the abscess.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then bring together the two lips of the bone with one stitch, then treat it as you would any other wound until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find that the egg is rotten due to another disease, then you should ligature the veins that are suspended, fearing a flow of blood.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	Then cut off the testicle at its attachment, and remove the testicle itself, and treat it as we have described.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if the fluid has gathered into two parts together, know that these are two hernia;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	then cut off the other part in the same way as you did the first, then wash away the blood, and put soft lamb's wool soaked in rose oil into the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put another piece of lamb's wool soaked in wine and oil over the testicles, then place double linen over it, and tie it up with the string following this pattern.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two pieces of linen and stuff them with lamb's wool following this pattern, and sew them together at the crotch of the breeches, so that one piece goes over the buttock to the back, and the other over the groin.
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	and the other two chiefs above the two angles, and the entire restraint must be gathered in the loop of the bandage.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and sometimes this ramice of cautery is medicated in place of the iron knife; and you must grip the subtle cautery knife, and cut the skin of the testicles, and it should be heated as we have said so that the white pus contained in the water is revealed.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	if one takes the cautery according to this form and pierces that testicle with it, and scorches it with this subtle hot cautery;
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And scrape it in every way you can, until you draw it all out.
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and beware that the fire does not touch the testicle;
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	and know that this work is safer;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and while being mindful of bloodletting, and changes in the testicles;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if nothing makes it worse, such as an abscess, or bloodletting, or anything else, then treat what makes it worse, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is fearful and unwilling to undergo this procedure due to its horrifying nature, then perform incision as I have told you, and when you are certain from the signs we have discussed that the water has been expelled, have the patient sit up on a high seat.
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	Then pierce the abscess at its base all the way to the underlying tissue, and place the incision at the longest part of the body.et adonques remens li cors a son leu; et s’il s’estrange ou se retuit, si tuit li corps en sa guize, ou
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	And then return the body to its proper alignment; and if it becomes dislocated or twisted, then adjust the entire body in its natural position, and broaden the incisions so that
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then place cotton over the wound, dress it, and leave it to drain the remaining fluid, then treat the wound until it is healed.et si la mort vienne dedenz, il ne te doit moudre, por ce qu’il a paor et doute de la mort;
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	and if the white membrane does not let water out of the mouth of the wound, then you should apply a tube or instrument to draw out the water as with dropsical patients, whose form is described above;
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and dilate the wound, and know that the water will return, and is collected after six months or so around it, and when it is collected as before, then the disease will run its course.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the cutting of this vein there is fear in many dispositions, because of which I think it better to leave it alone;
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you the treatment and the appearance of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I say then that many abscesses come from the body, especially in the groin;
et c’est par mout de cas.	and this is by far the most common case.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	This is known to be caused by excessive bitterness and bile, which is spread to the groin, or from a blow;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	and the color of the abscess follows the color of the body;
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and does not hurt, and is a serious abscess;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and sometimes an abscess is grey and purulent, with a pus-like appearance, and at other times it comes from a vein, or inflammation of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from a vein, it is recognized by the warm feeling of the abscess when pressed with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and you must not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	That which comes from inflammation of a vein is recognized by its appearance when pressed with the fingers, and one can safely lance it according to these signs, and in the same way for the others;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it is necessary to cut the top of the egg-white, then the yolk will come out on its own, and the membrane will be released from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the eye is sore from these new ointments, then you should wash the eye, and the lid.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if there is an ulcer in the eyelid, or on what is inside the eyelids, then you should free all that tissue and wash it thoroughly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the yolk is at the back end, then you must open it all and remove the yolk as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is finished, then dress the wound with soft lambs' wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapper similar to the bud of a branch, with the softening of the testicles, and it causes great pain when the patient urinates.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And the treatment for this disease is just as fearful as that one above, and yet we shall tell you about it according to how the ancients did it.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	You should make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then squeeze the testicles with your fingers towards your body at the part where they are attached to the root of the penis, and tie them tightly, pulling them upwards.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	then cut the skin with a sharp knife across the vessels, so that they are uncovered, and then scorch on each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then he inserts a needle with a doubled thread, and ties it at the first place where the vis came out, and ties it directly to the other end;
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then he cuts them in the middle, following the length of the body, and draws out the corrupted moisture;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then he treats the wound as in the others, so that no blood vessel that nourishes one of the testicles is cut;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	because no harm comes from it, and if blood comes from all the vessels, then one must draw out the testicles from all the vessels;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the vein does not lose its nourishment because of the incision of the vessels, and dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rot of the sinus
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The cause of this disease is due to the incision that comes from the syphilitic sore, or the swelling on the abdomen in the region of the intestines, causing them to descend from this passage to one of the orifices.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	and this passage is either from the syphilitic sore or from the swelling; and these two types arise from many causes:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	either from a blow, or jumping, or screaming, or lifting a heavy object, and from similar activities;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs that it is from the swelling of the syphilitic sore are that it happens little by little over a long period of time and does not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the abscesses are even throughout, towards the depth, because the syphilitic sore presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs of dislocation of the shoulder blade are that it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and there are various abscesses under the skin near the surface, which is due to the exit of the intestines and the body being displaced by the shoulder blade.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the nerves are displaced with the intestines, and it is retained inside, causing great pain to the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments, one should fear, for which it is necessary to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the way to treat it is to instruct the patient to pull the intestine back into the wound with his hand if he can reach it;
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then rub his neck between your hands and lift his hips;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then they cut the hair on top, and shave all the hair from the long neck;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then cut the skin around the navel with knives according to what you need to open the wound, and it should be such that the intestines can come out;
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then scrape off the skin under the hair on the scrotum, until the white scrotum is exposed all around;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	then insert your index finger into that which is under the scrotum, in that which is between the white scrotum and under the skin of the testicle, and between the second scrotum, and separate that which is behind the testicle, and between the second scrotum;
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	then move your right hand to the scrotum, and hold the white scrotum up in your left hand, and lift the testicle with all its skin towards the navel;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the assistant to extend the arm upwards, and loosen what is tight behind the elbow;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and feel with your fingers if there is any tough, white membrane or intestine wrapped around it, and if you find anything, push it back into the belly below;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	then take a needle with a thick thread made of six threads, and insert it into the back part of the sac, which is behind the skin of the testicles;
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	after the needle has passed through the sac, then grasp the head of the needle with your fingers so that there are four threads hanging;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	then tie the threads one above the other in the shape of a cross, and bind the sac, which we said is under the skin of the testicles, with a strong knot made of two parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	then wrap the head of the needle and threads, and tie it firmly with two parts so that none of the vessels that supply blood to it can enter, lest an abscess forms there;
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and apply the cautery according to the first long line of two lines from that, and after these two lines, leave the syphilis which is under the heart of the testicles, the larger one of the two;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and then all the other according to the roundness that the egg carries;
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	then cut into the part which is under the skin of the testicles, until the blood runs, and the bowels, as we have said before;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then apply moistened wool in oil, and place it on the wounds, and then apply the cautery that we have described.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white syphilis that we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this happens many times, and leave the cautery until it cuts through it;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it is slow to cut, then use hot water, and apply what we have described until it cuts through;et s’il ne se peut checier per lui, si covient il remestre la piere de selonc la dislocation que nos avons dit.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then cure the wound with another cure, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of carnous hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this chapter I have never seen anyone dare to perform the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said that it is done like the thread that is together with the thread, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after the incision above, slightly under.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	Then cut it halfway, and cure the abscess of what opens, until the vessels drain;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.Et s’ele ne veut chier, tu l’endures par guaiace et par baume, si com
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	And if it does not drain, you endure it with a poultice and ointment, as we have said, and the abscess breaks open, as we have said, and the pus drains out;
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and none of the intestines come out, and if any do come out, it is a little, and they heal every hour;Et s’el est si grande qu’ele soit a grant dolur, tu la fendes en deux ou en trois partz, si que li sang ne deffuit point, et l’endures tant que li
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and yet if it remains too long in this condition, the wound or fistula will increase in size as the intestines descend.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this happens due to the extension of the fistula, which is in the anus, as we have said, because it extends and then becomes soft and swollen and open;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	and the treatment for this is through cauterization, as we have previously stated;
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and sometimes it is cured by iron in the following manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	and let the patient lie on his back between your hands, then press down on the area around the wound, according to its size, a palm's width at a time;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	then pull out the fistula which is under the skin, then take the reed and place it on the visible area of the fistula;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press it deeply into the belly, then cut the two visible ends of the fistula on top of the reed, cutting them one after the other;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then pull out the head of the rope, and do not cover it with anything or stretch the ureter or anything else, as I have made you aware in the treatment of the ramus of the intestines;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	then treat it according to the treatment for wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, cleanse and treat the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The syphilis is hidden, and has no appearance in the mouth; and the cautery is effective in this place, and is closer to a cure.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	from the softening of the skin of the testicles
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Often the skin of the testicles becomes soft in some men due to the organs within becoming soft, and it is visible;
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	and when one wants to treat it, they must make the patient lie on his back, and cut the skin that is soft on top of the skin of the scrotum;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	then bring together the two lips with one stitch, and if you see it, sew the excess of the soft skin firmly with three or four stitches;
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	then cut between the stitches, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, and remove the thread.
dou chastrement	from chastity
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Know that castration is prohibited by our law, and for this reason I would prefer not to discuss it in this book.
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and is only necessary for two reasons:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	the first is so that the doctors know how to respond when asked, and know how to treat it;
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	and the other is because we often need castration of certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and pigs and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	Therefore I say that castration is done in two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	either by吸引or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	For the one that we do by吸引, we make the animal sit in warm water until the testicles are soft and hanging;
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	then grab them with your hand and hold on until they come off and you no longer feel anything.Et li autr’est selonc la fente que nos faisons sur la chair a la fine de la verge, dont suit l’evacuation de
Du chastrement de taille:	Of the castigation of the waist:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	you must tie the beast, and press the hide of its testicles in your left hand, then slap the suspender, and hit each testicle once, when you have well-scorch them;
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and leave some pus of the scrotum and the subtle scrotum which is under the testicles;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	and this type of castigation is better than that which is done by pulling, because with pulling, something might remain in the testicles, causing the beast to desire lust;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	then cure the wound until it heals.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	There are two types of hermaphrodites in men:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	one is where between the two testicles appears what looks like a woman's vagina, with hair, and sometimes it urinates in this position.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is in women, and has on the little finger as well as a rod and two scrotums.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the treatment of both man and woman is that you cut off the swollen testicles, and treat them like any other wound;
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	in the second manner, men from whom the urine jumps through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the testicles
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	Tentigene is a scar formed on the natural part, so much so that it is too ugly to look at;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	and some women have them as large as a hand, and that is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	You should dye the excess of the tentigene with your hand or fingernails, and then scratch it gently;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not go too deep, lest bleeding occurs, then the cure of one cure until it is healed;
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	and at another wound that occurs at the mouth of the wound, and use it, and perhaps it will jump out, and is according to the appearance of a cow, and for this reason they called it "cow disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you must cope with it, as we have said about the tendon, and treat it until it is healed.
de erratique	of erratics
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	Irregularity occurs when the nature of a woman is not understood, or the opening is small.
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	It can be natural from birth, or it can be an accident caused by illness that arises in it.
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	Or it is due to a stricture, or a thin or thick membrane, and it is made deep inside the stomach, or on the sides, or underneath, or wherever it may be.
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	And it affects conception, childbirth, and potentially flowering.
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	And the understanding of this is through observing the dance.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the stumps are visible nearby, you can pick them with your fingers or with a stick.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is due to a thin membrane and it is close to the lips, then you should be quick about it, and they will heal thusly:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	Place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread out.
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	Then press the lips together until the thin membrane is punctured and the swelling goes down.
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	then take wool, moisten it in oil, and place it on the area; have the woman lie still each day so that it may not heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the sty is hard and thick, you must cut it with a spatula like a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the wound is from a new birth, then suspend it at the umbilical cord and the navel;
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	and have stanching medicines, such as aconite, dragon's blood, incense, and egg white;
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	then administer a wide-mouthed jar, so that the wound may not heal;
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and in this way for a long time, and then administer a tent made of dry linen;Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is from a new birth, then suspend it at the umbilical cord and the navel; and then perform other treatments until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when there is flesh damage, it should be cut according to this manner, unless it is an ingrown abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For in an ingrown abscess that is in the joint, one must not cut.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Hemorrhoids are openings in the veins which usually happen without cause, and when they are old they become thrombosed;
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	and we have already discussed in the division the similarities of ears, and the signs, and I will now describe those which are curable.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and thrombosed piles, when they are deeply embedded in the rectum, and do not appear to the touch, are not cured by the application of a hot iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the mouth of the rectum, which one can feel, can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	Therefore, you should put the woman in a cold room, then pull out the hair with tweezers, and apply powder to the roots made from blood-restraining medicines, such as aconite and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things;
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	then bind her feet to the wall for an hour, then place her in cold water;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	and if there is bleeding, then have her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel and galls, and similar things, and then take barley flour, and boil it with honey and garlic, and make a plaster from it to apply to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it is staunched, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If not, then have leeches applied to her back and breasts without bleeding;
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	then take lamb's wool, soak it in plantain juice or dogwood juice mixed with old wine, and apply it to the area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess has drained, treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	And that which is called "albathir" is red and resembles rough ash; it should be covered as I have said before.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses in the anus
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses occur in the body, such as ulcers and pus-filled sores, herpes, cysts, and hemorrhoids, as well as hot abscesses, and several other ailments which I have mentioned in the classification.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	Therefore, I shall discuss in this treatise the hot abscess that occurs in the bowels, which is not among those that occur in the body:
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	and if you want to know about the treatment of iron, then observe whether the abscess is hard at the beginning of its appearance, and filled with heat and fever, and whether it turns red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Then do not hurry to pierce it, but let it heal as long as the pain is relieved;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	and then have the patient sit on a chair, and have two small chairs on which to lean, and support his back and gather his feet towards the affected leg;
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	and let his thighs be spread out, and he should place his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good rope;
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	then open the wound towards the right side, and administer the instrument to open the mouth of the wound, from which the form comes afterwards;
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	and it is necessary that when you see the instrument administered, you push it in slightly at first to determine the depth of the wound, so that what goes into the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and it does not harm the patient;
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	and if the instruments are larger, then they must cover the depth of the wound with cloth so that the instrument does not harm them;
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	and one should place the tip of the instrument on top and grip it tightly.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscess has been opened and they have done so by hand, then they must cover it with a bandage around the head or shoulder.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	and when the bowels are emptied, then one must put into the wound wet tenting soaked in rose oil or in dry green oil;
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	and place the tenting over the wound at the bottom of the wound, and put another bandage over the wound and over the clean finger wet with water or with mallows that have been cooked;
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then the wound will be cured after two days of ointment, as long as it is healthy;
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and sometimes we raise it and cure the wound with a clyster of water and honey, and then of water in which roots of iris and aristolochia have been boiled for a long time;
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	then return to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is depressed into the injury, then you should be careful not to cook with iron, but heal it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	It is necessary for the midwife to first know the natural shape of childbirth and the signs; when you see the woman push downward and desire to smell the air:
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	then the child will hurry to come out;
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	then you know that this childbirth is according to nature, and the birth canal is under his head, and the afterbirth with him;
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	and when you see these signs, then you should gently press her belly so that the child comes out quickly;
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	for when he descends upon his head, the afterbirth comes with him, and the birth canal is cleansed of its excesses by good cleaning;
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For it sometimes comes on its feet and comes out of the body or the shoulder, and the hands, or it comes over his stomach, or under, and is accidentally turned around his neck, and in other evil shapes;
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	It is necessary for the doctor to be wise and subtle in these matters, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the shapes and how one should help them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the child comes out on top of his head through a natural opening, and the mother gives birth painfully, and her strength is weak, then make her sit on a saddle, or have women hold her;
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	and put the doctor's small spatula, of which I will now describe the form, between her lips:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and split the membrane, and scrape with his nail until the fluid that is within runs out;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and press the woman's abdomen so that the fetus descends, and if it does not descend, then the woman should be given a clyster of fennel with oil of sesamum.
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	Then make her press and sneeze with this condiment, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour.
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	Now if the child is born immediately.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if both hands come out, you must then gently push them back in a little bit at a time.
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	And if they cannot go back in, place the woman on a seat, and elevate her feet.
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	Then lift the seat off the ground, and tighten it around the woman so that she does not slip while standing up.et si le corps ne puet aler par le col, si covient le clysterier de fenugrec et oile de sisament;
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the body cannot go through the neck, then she should be given a clyster of fennel and oil of sesamum. And if the hands cannot go in and the child is dead, cut off the fingers at the knuckles as mentioned earlier, extract the child, and reset in the same way.Et si li enfes ne puet aler par le col tant qu’il soit en la mort, et tu n’i poues faire que
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the birth of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes out feet first, it must be turned upwards.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	And then turn it bit by bit until it is straight;
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then grasp one of the feet and stretch it out bit by bit.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	If it jumps up to the crotch, instruct it to grab hold and make it sneeze from that position;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if it jumps out, God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it doesn't jump out as we have said, then slowly turn it back to its natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is easy.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it does not come out as we desire, take myrrh, tall oil, gum mastic, and grind them all together in a mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and apply this ointment to the woman's private parts and make her sit in warm water up to her ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is softened underneath, place the myrrh collar underneath her and leave it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then have her sit on a stool, then make her sneeze and constrict her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child will jump now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	the child will emerge onto its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this way, he puts his hands on it little by little;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	then he is put to rest on his neck, and his feet hang down, and he lies on the bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and bends his arms little by little, and then he presses his hands on her belly, and takes the cushions from under her, so that she is straightened out below;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the child does not jump, he takes his feet and moves them about, then he moves her belly upwards, then he puts his hands in;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and makes the baby jump little by little;
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and instructs the woman to press until the child emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the emergence of the child who comes out with one hand hanging down
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	I must devise a way to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if it cannot be brought back, then have the woman rise and walk;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot walk, then have her lie on the bed and lift her legs straight;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then bring the mouse trap that I have described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not give birth, then have her sit on a chair, and then try to bring back the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and hold the child according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and command that she grasps it until it comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the child's exit above its neck, and spread her hands, and turn her face towards her mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	Let the assistant grab her hand, then slowly turn it back and forth, and wiggle it gently;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is even, place the mouse trap of alatris and oil, as we have said, then command that she moves it slowly back and forth;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	and when you have done this, have her sit on a chair, and instruct her to hold herself steady.
et la fai esternuer.	and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same way for all the afterbirth
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When all the mucus has come out in this way, catch it with your finger so that the moisture is expelled;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if phlegm rises to her face and throat, catch it with your hand so that it is not retained and the infant dies;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then put the infant back inside, ensuring that he is placed correctly, and instruct the woman to hold herself steady several times:
adonques si istra legierement.	then she will be cured easily.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the hernia
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	You should know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born at once;
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	and this is not a strange occurrence, it happens often.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Twins are strange, and they do not live long if they do;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know them, that they are multiplied, and are separated by the styptic that divides them, which is bound to the wound.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and sometimes they emerge as naturally as a tail, just as we said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they emerge quickly, then the cure is as we have said, and the surgeon must be skilled, and do quickly and lightly what he does;
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and act in such a way that it benefits their health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	Sometimes they are formed in the womb one, or two, or three, or four, or five, or six, or seven, or more up to fifteen, and are all formed in the shape of a child according to the measure of the glorious sage, and the surgeon must know all this because sometimes similar things happen;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	and he must act accordingly.
de l’enfant mort	of a dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you are curing a woman of a dead child or abdomen, as I said in the division, and no pus comes out, and you are compelled to use your hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	if you must know whether the woman is of sound mind and has no incident where she fears death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	the woman should be laid on her back, with her head inclined downward and her legs raised;
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the midwife should apply the herbal remedy to the perineum, or if necessary, the woman should be tied to the bed to prevent her from giving birth;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oils infused with marshmallow root and fenugreek and flax seed, then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and herbs;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	then press gently on the mother's stomach, then push upward where she feels the urge to push, and take care that the child does not descend head-first;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	if the child's fingers are stuck in her own orifices or mouth or throat or under the chin or near the ears or on either side of her head, and if the descent is toward the feet, then push or pinch where you feel resistance;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and he must hold the needle with his right hand, and place the thread between his left fingers, and wind it around his whole hand lightly, and insert the needle in one of the places we have described, so that it comes to the empty spot;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is the shape of the needle:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then insert another needle, or a third if you need it, so that the extractions are equal;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then they are moved equally from one side to another, so that they exit; and the needles are bitten down to hold them in place, as shown in this image:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if some remains, he should smear oil on one of his fingers and insert it into that part, and pull out the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if none remains, he should put that needle or another higher up, and do this until it all comes out firmly.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be returned by stretching, then you must wrap it in a cloth, so that it hangs completely.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	Then place the cautery on the joint of the palm or the wrist, and you must do the same for the other hand and also the feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the head of the child is large and it is stretched out in delivery, or if it has an acute head gathered there, you must push the spatulum between your fingers, press the head, and extract the fluid.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	Or you can use the instrument called "almidach", from which the shape comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	And likewise, do the same if the child has a large head naturally;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	And then pull out the bones with pincers, and if the head pops out and is dislocated by force, it will be split as long as the fluids inside the head exit;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot come out, then cut it off piece by piece as you can.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if he is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce him so that the moisture runs out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the swelling is on his feet, the pull is light, and the movement towards the mouth of the wound is easy.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if he is constipated in the belly or anus, then you must stretch him with a cloth wrapped around his hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and open the belly or anus so that the moisture runs out;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and if the other members are swollen and the urine does not flow, then he should hold his hand over the wound and pull it up to the mouth of the wound;
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	then he puts in his finger or two and pulls it out;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed by a hot abscess that has formed there, one should not work on it, but rather apply moist and greasy substances;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and the minister applies poultices, and soaks it in warm water that softens and moistens.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the hernia is on his side, and you can make it even, then administer what we have said about the living child:
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if one has no power over it, then treat it bit by bit and leave nothing of the afterbirth.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, administer what we have said about hot abscesses that come in the belly;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if blood-letting comes about, then it should be put into restraining water and other remedies administered.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly some fetus had been dead, then another was sewn over it, and the other died as well.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came in her armpit, and swelled so much that it opened, and began to discharge profusely.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the priest, and I thought for a long time, and could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong attractive plaster, and an bone came out, and after a few days another one did too.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very surprised because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought they were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I probed the wound, and in so doing pricked some bones until the woman was in a better state;Et si li fuert l’os traiet, si le tuit sanz quebrure, et la plaie curat.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	And if the bone was pricked, then it should all be done without breaking and the wound healed.And so the woman lived a long time like this, and sometimes she felt a bit of pain in that spot;Et si li fuert l’os traiet
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have recorded this chapter only because when the masters find a strange thing, they know to apply a remedy.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the dislocation back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Here follows the form of the press, which is described in books:
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and has two turns around the two shoulders.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Nevertheless, the horns of the restrictor should be more subtle, made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and the mouth of the tube should be two digits wide and the rim of the trees one and a half palms long;
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and in between the two limbs there should be two ajustments of this same wood, which are firmly attached to both, half a palm long or a little more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	and these two adjustments are fitted into the mouth of the tube in order to open it when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, which is more subtle and lighter, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of tongs:
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and has two heads, as you can see, one palm long, and two fingers wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and when you see the woman open to all instruments, make her lie on her back with her feet hanging and her legs open, then insert the two instruments together into the wound, and hold the head of the instrument between her thighs;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then work your hand on the instrument, just as you did with the tongs equally, according to the amount that you see open the mouth of the wound, until the midwife does what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	These instruments are all tipped and have many variations in their appearances;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	and when the midwife has prepared them, then the work is swifter and higher in men due to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not be discouraged by the instrument until you have prepared it, for their needs are not preventable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold in her breath and then make her sneeze from time to time, and squeeze her hands around her mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if she jumps through the air, all is well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, take the pot and make a cover for it, placing herbs inside that can open the mouth of the wound, such as comfrey, fennel, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	All these herbs, or any of them, should be cooked in the pot over fire;
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	then place one end of a rod or stick into the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the wound, and hold it there until the vapors enter the wound;
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	then make her sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	Then the secondine suddenly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if she still remains after this treatment and does not recover, instruct the midwife to wet her left hand in oil of wormwood or in a poultice of alder buds, then insert it into the birth canal and extract the placenta;
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and when she has found it, she should grab and extend it little by little straight, so that the bone does not break upon extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	but it must be moved slightly to the right and left, and then pulled.
si venra et se desaerdra.	it will come out easily.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the wound is tight, we have discussed the cure for sneezing, and the fumigation of herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it does not improve with what we have said, then you must be careful when pulling;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that whoever is at the mouth of the wound, should tie it to the thigh of the woman, then cleanse with the four-part ointment;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	it will come out and return;
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	but nevertheless, when it comes out there may be a foul odor in the stomach and head, and it will harm the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	Then smoking is necessary for this:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	one of the ancients has experimented with fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one smokes out the woman for the retention of flowers and afterbirth, if it is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is made of glass resembling a cane, and the thin end is placed in nature, and the broad ends above the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and the fumigation is on the coals, and the lice until they are destroyed, and then start another.
de percier lou fondement	of piercing the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have the foreskin pierced, but the skin is closed with a subtle slit:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	then one should at the circumcision pierce that slit with her nail, and not cut it with a sharp blade, and guard against touching the foreskin.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put on wet milk with wine and oil, then the ointment cure until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will heal, then put a splint of wood through the wound, and leave it for several days, and remove it when the child wants to walk.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And sometimes this clotting comes from a wound or abscess suddenly;
si covient coper celui soudement:	Then one must suddenly cover this.
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	if it is to be cured, as we have said about the vein of the penis.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the fistula in the anus
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that come from under the buttocks are nodular and grow from beneath the anus, or in the space between the two halves of the anus, and may be single or multiple.
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	And when this nodule is old, it opens, and usually there is moisture that causes white pus or thin fluid, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent.si est en la fesse ou deuz la cosse si a grant dolor sus les testiculos et les cosses, si covient elever celui membre tant com il puet, et si le covient adoucer, si doit adou
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And they are caused by what comes out through the anus or through flatulence when the patient passes gas, and sometimes a worm may come out.si la fistule est desouz la fesse et non pas sur le costé de la cosse, si covient elever celui membre tant qu’il puet, et adoucer la partie qu’il ne
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if there are sores that pierce all the way to the bladder, and halfway down the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and reach all the way to the hip joint, and to the bottom of the groin.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one knows a fistula piercing in the anus, and not piercing at all:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and you push your index finger into the anus, and push a thin bronze or iron needle into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it has twisting, then you insert a flexible wire, or horsehair, as far as you can feel the wire or hair with your finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and it does not cause any evacuation, wind, or pus, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	then you know it is not piercing through;
si te haste dou curer.	if you wish to cure it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula extends to the bladder or the urethra, and the urine leaks out, and cannot be stopped by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced to the hip joint, then the tented vein will reach that spot.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no tortuousness and the pain is not relieved by it, then it will not be helped by medicine or ointment.s'il n'y a pas de tortuosité et que la douleur ne soit pas soulagée par elle, alors elle ne sera pas aidée par la médecine ou l'onction ;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these persisting fistulas there is no cure despite effort and the vain attempts of foolish doctors who interfere.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In those that are not persisting and are not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back;
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and he should raise his legs up to his hips, and have his hips tilted towards his stomach;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then push in a tent of bronze or lead if there is tortuousness, as far as you know the vein goes.puis boute une tente darain ou de plonc si il y a tortuosité  ;
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the pain is felt around the anus, then you must insert your finger, provided that the skin has not been pierced.
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	and it should be uncovered where you feel between your finger and the flesh, then you will know that it is perforated;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if it cannot be reached, then it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	They say nonetheless that some can be healed, but that happens rarely;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the aid that is done, one burns the cautery subtly according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	and pour it all hot into the fistula, until it comes out through the anus;
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and do this two or three times, until you know that those charred flesh pieces are burned, which resemble an owl feather;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	And then the cauterization with moist tents until that swelling goes down, then the application of ointment to bind and heal.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus healed, that is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If this is not done, they cannot be healed otherwise.
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	And if the tent pierces and does not reach the bone which is in the foundation, and there is between your finger and the tent a thick covering of pus or of syrup, and you see the fistula below the covering of the flesh;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If you cut off the beginning of the fistula and fill it up before the tent, and then cauterize it afterward, until it reaches the top of the tent;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	And the tent will be delivered, and it will fall out;
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	Then cut off those false growths that look like a bird's feather, and nothing will remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the pus runs out, and flows between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or with medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cautery joins two things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	Here is the translation: This includes scorching of these swollen cars, and oozing of blood and drying of moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then the treatment of moist tents with butter or crushed substance, until the swelling goes down and the burned cars heal;
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then treat the wound of sudden, painful, hard growths on the body, and the remedies are dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes all the way from the anus, and is separated from the body, put your finger in it or plug it up, and ask for help.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you sense a tent, and within it is a thread or string, or the growth, or it is about to pierce through, then there must be no fear or despair, but rather hope and expectation, through the administration of one of three remedies:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	either you cauterize it as we have said, or cut it down to the bottom, or if you can, put in tents and treat it as before;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too deep that you do not cut the lining that holds the foundation, and let the discharge come out through there naturally;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then treat, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	by chance if it is healed, or you remove that covering and clean it once it has been cut away from the foundation, or with a tent or another pointed instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then pierce the infected bone in the wound as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	then work to heal the wound and to stop the fistula from draining into the abdomen:
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	if it is more convenient for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And sometimes fistulas are like this:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is on the side next to the abdomen, take a pointed tent shaped like this:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And thread .ii. threads through it, and push the tent all the way through the fistula until it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is deep in the margin of the abdomen, then pull out the thread from that hole, so that you can push your finger into the abdomen;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and draw the head with thread, and bring the two heads together, and tighten them against each other, and leave it for one or two days;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and hold it sometimes, until the threads cut through the flesh between them, and they separate.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then cure the wound so that it heals and scabs over.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not burst, then have it burst in every way you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because it is not appropriate to bandage too tightly and then to treat, as we have said, until it has healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the spiny spatulum used for making a fistula is very sharp on one side, and pointed;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other side it is not, so that one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	There are two types of hemorrhoids:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	or they are inside the anus, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they ooze blood, and there is one or more of them, and they are found inside and at the top of the anus;
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	but those which are out of joint have little moisture, and still a little water or a little yellow water or a little blood, and they have the color of the body;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment for those who have them in the anus is that you instruct the patient to defecate so that the anus opens and the threads appear.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	Take it with tweezers or hold it with your fingernail, then pull it out at its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the tweezers cannot hold it because of the moisture, take it with a piece of cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chamois leather;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	pull them out with your fingers, then cut them, and powder them with some hot powder that is in the place of cautery;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you can cauterize it as mentioned in the chapter on cautery, after treating them with other remedies until they are healed;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the fundament cannot emerge, then enema the patient with a sharp and asperous enema to wash away what is in the fundament so that it can emerge openly.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	then the patient should strain, and if the thread comes out from the fundament, then the cure is easy;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and you should grab them with your nail or tongs and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed and the incision closed with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	You must administer the suturing in the following manner:Prens li fil de l’asne ou del mazuret, ou del garse, qu’il soit fort et leg
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take a strong and thin thread of donkey, mare, or horse hair, twist it tightly, thread it into a needle, then pull the two ends of the thread through the eye of the needle from one side and back out the other, leaving a loop. The thread should be twice as long as the wound is wide;
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and tighten the thread tightly, then tie the thread, and pull out the needle, and do likewise with all the others, and leave one to stop the flow of blood;
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then place a wet cloth soaked in rosemary oil or cerate over the wound, and apply pressure to the wound, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then let him go until he defecates, and when he has finished, treat the wound with ointments and other remedies until it heals.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	from dryness of the vagina or anus
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is dryness of the bowels in the intestines, and due to the constraints of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If necessary, cut off the nail at the quick, or use a spatulum to remove the loose piece of nail, being careful not to damage the nailbed.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	Then treat the wound as needed until it is clean and healed.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	If it cannot heal, then re-cut the nail more aggressively than before, until it heals and is smooth.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat until healed.
dou fremit	where it trembles
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A wart is a small growth on the body, which moves deep inside;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and sometimes the wart chills, and one feels it as numb, and it comes all over the body, but more on the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And its treatment is to take a feather from a goose or a strong owl, and place that feather on the numbness until the purple circle around the numbness disappears all around.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand over the entire feather until you cover all around the numbness, and push it deeply, and pull out the numbness from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make it with a cane of bronze or iron according to this form, and let it be thin underneath and drawn out on top.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	Do not pierce it, lest it remain in the body, and press hard.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you want to cauterize the numbness, as it is done before in the chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the shape of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	One makes a clyster from silver or gold, or from melted and hammered copper;
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	and sometimes they are made small or large according to those who receive them.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those that are administered to children, the weak and sick, should be small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the enema, whether it is small or large, depends on the width of the rectum, according to this method:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	And one makes an incision on the abdomen, as you see, and the intestines are pierced inside;
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	and there is one hole on each side;
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and the abdomen where the medicine is placed is made from a beast's bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small holes, and there should be one finger width between each hole, then insert into these holes a strong thread twisted in an X shape or spiral around, and assemble the abdomen as if it were a goat;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread in front, then clysterize;
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And its shape is circular:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And the medicine should not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the tip of the syringe with oil or egg white, or similar, then insert it gently;
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	Then the assistant squeezes the bulb with both hands simultaneously until it is empty, then withdraws the syringe and lets the patient straighten his legs, and if the medicine wants to come out, let him strain as much as he can;
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And if he sleeps for a night afterwards, it is of greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you use the syringe for the sickness of a flowing stomach, and the medicine rushes out, he should repeat it until he is cured.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are internal or an abscess, then the syringe should be as thin as for a child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And its shape is slender where the skin is stretched:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have already said in the section on wound treatment:
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	And you shall tell of the cures of hands and of medicine, according to what is accomplished.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the place where the wounds are made, and what makes them.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by splitting of stone, and cutting with sword and knife, or spear or staff or arrow, or similar objects;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or according to the locations in the body, such as a wound that falls upon the neck, or head, or thigh, or belly, or liver, and similar organs;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds in the head, for the memory will come to me as I go.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, then take care whether it is from splitting of stone or similar objects, and the skin is still broken and the wound is large, and you fear quickly an abscess of heat:
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	if he immediately bleeding from the cephalic vein if it comes little blood from the wound, and let the bleeding be in the opposite direction of the damaged part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and prevent the patient from eating wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to bleed, let his food be diminished, and do not drink wine or eat meat;
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and put cotton moistened only in rose oil or wine on the wound if hot abscesses come out;
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no hot abscess, put on the wound, which must be fresh with all its blood, and not moved by air, powder, which I will describe a little later;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the air has moved it, put some ointments on it until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like that of a sword, and the lips cannot be brought together by sutures, then bring them together by stitches, as I will describe for wounds in the abdomen, in the rib cage.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is exposed to the bone, and can be sewn up, and it holds except for a little bit, then sew it up;
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	then heal the wound with medicine, and restore firm flesh in place of the skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as testicles and cooked wheat, as well as poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find pus in the skin, and it does not reach the bone, then scrape off all of the pus, and pour it out, then heal it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which causes bleeding, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then tie off the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then bind it with a thread;
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is easy:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and you should put on this powder that heals as soon as the fire has moved.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the way of making the powder is as follows:
pren encens une partie;	take incense one part;
sanc de dragon II parties;	dragon's blood two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	fine chalk three parts, and powdered very finely, and apply the powder to the wound, and hold it firmly, until it clings well and draws out all the blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	then bind it up tightly, and leave it loose if it swells;
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	for one does not remove the medicine until the wound is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes cautery is done with a hot iron only, when one does not have incense or dragon's blood; but the wound must be moved by the cautery.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the burn has moved the wound, do the same, but don't apply any of this powder;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but rather apply some digestive ointments, or barley flour made with water and honey, until the swelling goes down;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if there is a broken bone with the wound, and it is small, then hold it with fine pins;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you about fractures of the head afterward.
de la plaie dou col	of a wound on the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is in the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it's a nerve, there should be nothing done but to leave the wound alone and not put anything constricting on it, because it hurts the nerves and makes them withdraw.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	And nothing cold should be placed on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	But the medicine should be warm, like chamomile washed in warm water and mixed with rose oil, and cooked wash also in warm water, and other herbs of similar nature, and moist poultices.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, cut it and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and she has a hernia and is full of bowels, then cut her open higher up or lower down.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if an artery is cut and bleeding results, then ligate it, and let it be cut out, and cauterized if necessary.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the windpipe, and the airway is kept clear so that the meat can pass through, then press on the windpipe above the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape;
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then gently tighten it, and leave it for a few days, then treat it with cleansing ointments until it is healed;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then fill it;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and if there are bone fragments, then remove them all as much as you can, and those that you cannot reach, leave them until the wound heals, and the bloodletting is complete;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, then powder it with the powder I have described.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have described in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a spear or knife wound, and the wound is deep, then examine if from the wound any bad air escapes:
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	Know then that the wound is mortal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and if it is not deep and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put any powder on it in the first hour, nor tie it for the blood to stop pouring out, but let it return to the body and heal the patient.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	but apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	and if you do not have an ointment, put old cotton in the wound to draw out moisture and let the patient sleep on the wound for three days or four or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	and if no spasms come, nor trembling of the heart, nor pain in the joints;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see these good signs, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Heal it then with poultices and other remedies until it is healed;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	and if it cannot heal and work, then you know there is a fistula.
si la cure si com on doit.	treat the wound as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a cut by a sword or knife, and it is simple, on the front or back, then treat it as follows:
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	if it is large, stitch it up.
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	and if it is small, treat it with powder, and if it has cut into the bone, and broken off pieces, then clean the wound, and draw out the foreign bodies if they are lodged in there.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	And if they are not lodged, let the wound fester so that it will expel the foreign bodies.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	For other wounds on other limbs, the treatment is as we have already said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	There are many types of stomach ruptures: large, medium and small.Li grans est quan li corps del veine est rompu, ou quan li membre est desveu de
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	of a great wound except sometimes the intestines, or the nerves of the intestines, through which the entrance of air;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	and the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one, because one returns the intestines to it more often with pins, if one does not return them little by little from warm to cold;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	because the intestines swell as soon as they feel cold, so they return more often with pins, and that is why the smaller wound is better, because one resets the intestine to its place earlier than the others Ch.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And you should know that there are IV ways of rupture in the abdomen:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	the two common stitches occur in the stomach stitch, and the stitch of other wounds in the body; and two other own stitches are common to other wounds.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and nonetheless they are more appropriate with the stomach stitch, and I will say one of them and declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and something of the intestine has come out, and a tough thing is difficult to remove, it is by one of two ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, warm it in such a way:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	moisten a sponge or a soft cloth in lukewarm water only, or cook it in water with squill, cypress, and spike lavender, and warm the intestine until the swelling is gone;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and sometimes make a restraining wine, and apply it alone to deflate.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the swelling leaving, moisten the intestine with water or altus and mallows that have been cooked, for through this the entrance is constricted by a little.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a small incision with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	and the first treatment is cauterization rather than cutting unless there is a great need for it;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this is the instrument used to split it:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	it should be cut inside the curve and not through, and here is the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines jump out, he puts them back according to their natural shape in their proper place, if you have the power, because it is better that way.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is wide, and it is on the lower part of the abdomen, then you should make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and if it is on the lower part of the abdomen, then put the head and feet higher than the lower parts, and also if the wound is in one of the sides, then tilt the patient so that the wounded side is higher;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus one must treat both large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	For small wounds, take what is appropriate, then hold in your hand the instrument that burns all around the wound, and bring together the edges;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	and this is the common way of sewing it up, and you must pierce an needle or several, depending on the width of the wound, then leave a gap at the head of the wound, about the thickness of two fingers, and insert an needle there with a strong thread;
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	and pierce the two sides of the skin with the two ends of the sinew, which is under the skin inside, so that you make it pierce from that part, and bring together the two ends of the sinew tightly;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	then draw a double thread through the needle from both sides, then bring together the two sides of the wound neatly, and then leave another gap, and insert another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	then make the wound wet with the thread as you did for the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you need of needles, until the entire wound is bound.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	and let the needles be medium-sized, between fine and thick, for the fine needles cut through all the flesh, and the very thick ones cannot enter well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	because they should be medium-sized.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and one must not push the needles too deep into the flesh and skin, so that they do not cut and open the wound before it is healed.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	then cover the heads of the needles with thread, so that they do not hurt the patient when sleeping, and put tents or rags over the needle-heads to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	and this way of sewing with needles is best for small wounds, because it requires only one or two needles.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second stitch is common, and is where you sew together the two ends of the skin and the two ends of the syringe together with a strong, thin needle;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	and once you have pierced all four ends together, bring the needle back to where you started, in the manner that one sews sheets;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and leave a space between each stitch equal to the thickness of a thumb;
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	This stitch healed a man, and I sewed up a wound that a man had on his stomach, which was cut with a knife, and the wound was more than a palm wide, and the intestines protruded over two palms wide, and the wound was in the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned his intestines after they had been out for 24 hours, and the wound was sutured for 15 days, and I healed it, and he recovered.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And they had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where one could not find any medicine or treatment;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And put cotton on the wound twice a day, and wash it with honey water until it heals.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	I will tell you two proper methods of stitching:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle and pierce it through the outside just up to the inside;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	when it has pierced the skin directly, then lay hold of the thread where you put the needle in, and make it pierce through on the other side from inside to out;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and the understanding of this stitching is that you sew just as the furriers do with furs, and that you leave the thread once on one side and grab it on the other, so that the stitching is all completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second method of stitching, which Galen describes properly, is as follows: they assemble the two parts naturally and apply one end of the thread to the other, in such a way:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	stick a needle or sharp tool close to the edge, and pierce that spot only, and leave the two sides of the ulcer;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	then turn the needle, and have it pierce from outside to inside, through both sides of the ulcer;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then pierce one and then the other from outside to inside, in two more spots on the edge that are opposite each other;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the most common method of stitching.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Galen says this, and some testify to it: one should stitch the belly with two needles, with thread on both.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one should push one needle in from one side and the other from the other, like those who sew wounds;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	and know that when the wound is in the middle of the belly, the stitching is more difficult than other places on the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is like the judgment of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and it is such that when you probe the fresh wound to its full depth, so that the fire has moved it, then the intestines and the lining are put back into place;
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	then apply a powder with ointment on top of it while the wound is still open;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and sew up the wound, and close up the edges, and the maw;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound as you would any other, until it is healed;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and if you have no medication, then apply old cotton and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For in most cases where the wounds are simple, you don't need any other medication;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and if you doubt that the wound may affect the principal members, then you should wet a light cloth in warm oil, or rose oil, and place it around the armpits and under the armpits;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	and if he feels pain or swelling in the bowels, which often happens, then he should be enema with warm black wine, especially if the swelling reaches the intestines;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and it should be inserted into them, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine, which is called 'young', cannot heal when it is raw, and this is due to the thinness of the veins that it has, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and its proximity in nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the hernia protrudes from the wound, put it back inside along with the intestine while it is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	and if it is old and has become black or green, you should tie off the area that is black so that blood does not flow into it, for there are veins and arteries there;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	Then cut away the tissue between the ligature and place the two ends of the intestine hanging down below the wound until it is easy to extract when the hernia slips out, and close the wound tightly.
de la routure dou boueil	of the road of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestines are ruptured and the wound is small, it can sometimes be cured in some men, for I saw a man who was pierced through the belly with a lance;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became a fistula, and from it came both excrement and wind;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied treatment according to what I knew, and did not cease to apply poultices until he was healed and the wound scars closed over.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw that it was healing, I feared that the patient still had discomfort in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and he experienced no ill effects but rather improved in his appetite and digestion;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and some experiencers say that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it should be bound in such a way:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	take a large testicle, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the testicle has opened its mouth, place it upon both lips so that it holds them closed;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	and then cut off his head, and this will be held so that he cannot untie it, then put another noose after in the same way as before, until the wound is completely captured;
et cout la plaie.	and cauterize the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	If these worms enter the intestines and cause no harm to the patient, and one can tie off the intestines with a fine thread cut from an animal's intestine in such a way:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	take the end of this intestine thread that is very charred, and then tie to the end of this thread a fine linen thread wound tightly, then insert the thread into the needle, and cauterize the intestine, and tie it up in the wound;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this manner of sewing up with threads is not foreign to the path of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the small intestines, there is no healing other than through subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it wakes up, is universally called a "fistula", and especially when it is swollen and becomes pus-filled.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And a fistula is according to the green nodulation of a hardened and white pustule, where one does not feel pain, and it is as smooth as the feather of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes it erupts in a clear burst, and sometimes it is thick;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes it is small, and sometimes larger;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed and there is no scar, it is only due to one of the IX causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	that is to say, by the weakness of blood or body;
ou por sa malice;	or because of wickedness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is a hard scar within, and on the lips, that does not allow a scar to form;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or there is too much pus;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or the wound is rotten, and the matter is of poor quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or medicine does no good in its treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because the corruption is of a pestilential nature;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or because the disposition in the region is tardy in digestion, and late in health, and swollen by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	or there are veins or bones;
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of medicine in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now I will tell you about the treatment for a fistula that is done by hand.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that a fistula occurs in all parts of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	for it comes from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, to the face, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the sides, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it occurs in the disposition of the principal member, and in similar ways.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all fistulas that are of this manner are of grievous healing, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place I have said, and you have faith in the cure, and you see it, then take a tent of bronze or iron, if the fistula is straight, so take it.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	and if the fistula is crooked, then look for a subtle tent of lead, because lead bends around the crookedness.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot well probe it with tents, then cleanse it by enema through one of the openings, because moisture cuts from one opening to another.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	Then probe it with your strength to know if there is bone or nerve, and if the fistula goes deep. Ask the patient about his pain when you press with your hand, and where he feels the pain.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and when you know truly the location where it is, and whether it is far from joint, nerve, artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have instructed you, and remove the fault and corrupted flesh within.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	and then treat the wound until it is healed, and if the fistula is deep in a straight place, you should cut it deeply as you can, then put wet bandages soaked in medicine water, and apply them to the head of the fistula so that the medicine corrodes the excess matter remaining at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then put healing ointments on healthy flesh until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if it is not healed by this method, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If the vein or nerve does not trouble the principal limbs, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, then king's touch as much as the corruption is removed, then the cure of things in infection until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	and if not healed, and flexed back as before, know that you have not gone to the source:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	if uncovered and want to go to the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is thus healed, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other way except through cutting;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there is a small corrupt bone, and you can pull it out with tweezers, then remove it with the appropriate instrument for that, and if there are many bones, pull them all out and leave none behind;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	and if moisture makes it go against you, and there is no error or fear, then combat the moisture with fire and charcoal, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then put something to promote pus on the wound, and let it be around the bones until they become porous, and then they will have the bones more easily;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	and if it is a large bone, like that of the leg or thigh, then treat only the putrefaction until all blackness is removed, and then dress the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a large amount of it in the body, and it reaches the bone's marrow;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	then it should be cut off and covered all the way to the putrefaction, and then the wound should be treated until it is healed;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you can take example and aid from it in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	There was a young man of about 30 years who had pain in his leg caused by an internal issue, so that the matter came out into the leg, and it became swollen with a large abscess, and there was no way to release it by opening it;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	but the doctors, in their folly, worked on it so much that the abscesses opened and discharged a great deal of matter, and became a fistula, and many openings appeared that discharged pus and moisture from the body;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and many doctors treated him for 2 years, and there was no improvement in his condition, so that I was called to see him, and I examined his leg and the remedies with which he was being treated, and saw what was flowing from the openings into his body;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and the young man's body became red, and had a yellow color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I set up a tent in one of the openings, and then I searched all the openings, and found that some came face to face with others throughout the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I quickly examined one of the openings and discovered part of the bone, which was rotten and perforated, and the corruption was spreading to the bone inside;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I saw what appeared to be a rotted bone, and I thought there was no other corruption than that which I removed.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	And I began to treat the wound with dry remedies for a long time, but it would not heal.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	And then I began again and exposed the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, which I removed, and then I tried to heal the wound.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	But I could not until I cut around a palm's width of bone, and removed it to the root, then I restored it with remedies.
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	And it healed quickly, and there was no need to redo the operation except for the weakness of the patient who could not endure it, and because of the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For often the blood evacuated, but it was entirely healed, and in place of the bone a hard lump grew, and it was of good disposition and did not cause any harm or discomfort going or coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if a bone is broken in any part of the body, then one must treat it in this way:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	Take hold of it, and stretch it to the head of the bone that is exposed, and instruct someone to lift it upward.
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	And place another thicker piece of linen under the first piece, and tie it onto the flesh above the bone, and stretch the head, so that you draw up the corrupted flesh from below, and uncover the flesh above where you see it is, so that the thread does not cut into the flesh.
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	And place a hot brand or a flat object under the bone to cover up the corrupted flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And one must sew as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and sew again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then uncover all the flesh;
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	Then place a hot brand underneath, and sew from one part of the corruption to the other, with the thread close to the edge of the corruption as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, it corrupts the joint, and on the other side, the bone that contains it;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, there is no other remedy but to cut it off;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	and if the corruption is in the knuckle of the hand or the foot, it is a very serious matter, but nevertheless you must examine the corrosion and see how it appears to you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and cleanse it in every way you can, but be careful that the vein or nerve do not cause any harm;et si tu ne peus pas mondre celle corrosion sans nuire a la veine ne al’artere, mais covient que tu la mundifies par feu ou par caut
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and if you cannot cleanse the corrosion without harming the vein or artery, then you must cleanse it with fire or with cautery. And know that there are many different ways to cut and expose these bones, depending on their placement, appearance, thickness, smoothness, size, and hardness;et si li corruptions est en la veine ou en l’artere, et que li membre soit mort, si doit tu mondre celle veine oultre la corrosion, et le corps mort, selonc la grandece de la veine ou de l’artere, mais non pas plus longement que la veine ou l
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and therefore one must prepare for each type of procedure with their instrument.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and know that the work will show you the instrument you need, according to your knowledge of this art and the testimony of the ways of illnesses;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	then guess at the instrument you need based on what it needs.
dou feu	by fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	Shoulders dislocate either due to internal causes or external causes;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	and when you have treated that corrosion with medicine and it does not help, then you must cover the affected limb up to where the corrosion is, so that the patient escapes either death or the greater evil of losing the use of the limb;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	and if there are signs that the limb is turning black and it seems like it has been burned by fire, and after the blackness appears, then the corrosion spreads from limb to limb and affects the whole body;
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If you are bitten, cover the wound immediately, and if it is from the sting of a venomous creature such as a scorpion or serpent, and the bite is on the head or face, then cut off the affected limb and do not give the creature any time to reach your hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it reaches the hand, cut at the joint so that the venom does not travel up the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	And if it reaches the arm, cut at the elbow;
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	And if it passes the elbow, that is death, and there is no antidote to counter its power save according to its quantity.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	And thus you must act when the sting comes to the foot:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	If it comes to the first joint, cut after the next joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	And if it reaches the foot, cut off the entire foot;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it rises up the leg, it will stop at the knee joint.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, there is no cure but to let the patient die.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and the method of treating it is to tie the limb above and below, and extend one servant's arm below and another servant's arm above, and you cut the flesh between the two ties with a broad spatula, as far as the bone is exposed.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	then you stop the bleeding and put a linen cloth on each side so that the wound does not touch the healthy area, and cause him no further injury or abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if bleeding occurs when you open it, then cauterize the wound quickly, or put some restraining powders on it.et se li sang ne veult ceurrer, si quieras tu le lames a I piece pour le faire ceurrer, et que li sang vienne en la plaie, si met sus aucune poudres qui s’en
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then return to your medicine until it is complete, then tie the wounded member with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened to a man in his sleep;
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	he had a blackness that looked like a burn, and this corrosion came first on his big toe, so much so that it affected the whole foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man saw the corrosion, he immediately covered his foot, and it was healed;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and long after, the corrosion returned on his finger, and he came to me, and I applied poultices after cleaning the body, and he could not stop the corrosion;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he wanted me to cut off his hand, but I refused, as I had hope of repulsing the matter;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and I feared that if I cut off his hand, he would die, for the man's strength was weak;
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he became completely discouraged, returned home, and healed his hand;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have not included the stories about what happens if someone else does it, because I don't think we need them.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Sometimes an abscess forms in a fleshy part, and remains so long that it causes great swelling;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	then they rupture and drain, and the swelling goes down, and the place where they were is left hollow, like vessels;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and the skin above is as delicate as split silk, and it doesn't adhere to the bone or nerve; such a condition is called "healthy," not a "fistula.
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it becomes so long that it reaches the bone deeply, it is called a  "fistula.
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the skin such that you cup it all around, especially when it is delicate, just as a napkin.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and do not tear it for fear of damaging it.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you have faith that the skin will heal, and the damage is not complete, and the flesh is thick, then treat it thusly:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	examine if the breasts are swollen, and the belly has a foul odor, then cleanse with an Egyptian medicine made thusly:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	take asafoetida, and oil, and litharge, in equal amounts, and mix the ingredients into a vessel over fire, until the medicine turns red and as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	then take some according to your need, and dissolve it in water and honey, and cleanse the breast with it, and constrict the nipple;
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and let the medicine stay on for two hours, then remove it by squeezing.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Do this many times until the breast is deflated and the pain is gone;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	and sometimes they are cauterized with water of ashes when this medicine is not present, and it is done by taking ashes from vine wood, pouring water over them, then straining the liquid and using it as a cautery on the breast until you know that the breast is deflated.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or water of ashes, then use a cautery of water and honey with a pinch of powdered litarge.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	Or you can cauterize with honey and sweet wine, which has the property of cleaning and washing, and the wine makes the wound burn.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	And when you have done this and are certain that the breast is clean, then cauterize with something that makes a crust on it; take a diafinite ointment and mix it with rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you cleanse it with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken in the section on ointments.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	And if the nipple is small and the cannula of the syringe cannot enter, then enlarge it with a knife a little, and insert a tent made of the Egyptian ointment, or the ointment called basilicon, until it is enlarged.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if the wound is too large, then cut it and leave only the place where the syringe can enter, and if the opening that urinates is above, then cut below it, or higher up, whichever it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bowels are perverse, they do not digest food properly;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	And if you cannot cut the breast as you wish, then arrange it in such a way that the bowels move to the lowest place they can reach; for when the bowels are perverse, they do not digest food properly. And if you cannot cut the breast as you wish, then arrange it in some other way:
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	that the bowels move easily downward, and leave nothing of the bowels behind;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	and take consolative medicines to put over the wound, and they are on the linen cloth that covers all the wound;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	then cut the opening of the breast more widely than before, then put ointment on the other cloth according to the quantity of the opening, and put it on the wound to loosen the bowels, and do not remove the large cloth but after several days once;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and the one who is on the opening of the breast, remove often to remove the bowels, and know what comes from the bowels, whether it is poison or a little or enough, or digestion, or indigestion;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been applied in such a way and you see the nature that rises on the wound, then you know that the breast has healed, and the health approaches;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	and then loosen it in the morning, or at noon, and when you loosen the wound, change the other bandage and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast milk flows strongly after many days, you can be sure that the breast will not dry up.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons run long after a time, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are people whose wounds heal slowly, and others that heal quickly;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if milk does not flow from the breast after many days, know that the breast will not produce milk;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if the breast is delayed in producing milk and is distant, then apply dry medicines that are moist in substance but dry in virtue, such as an ointment of vitriol, for it is the best medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take an ointment of vitriol, and make it with rose oil, and rose water equal in substance;
puis le confit et en use;	then cook it and use it;
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	and with the same one makes honey cooked thickened, when ointments of vitriol are not available, or take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them, and sprinkle the powder on the honey when it is over the fire;
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and then they are bandaged with glue, and the poultice is applied to the chest, and sometimes an aristolongue root, and roots of celestial lilies, which is like flour made from herbs and centaury;
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	and they use simple medicines or compounds:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	They grind them into powder and mix with the honey I mentioned, and use it;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	and if the wound is long and not healed by this treatment, then know that the corruption is in depth, and it makes an impression on the bone, or on the hard limbs, or on the tissues;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the wound of the fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the nail abscess
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	A panaris is an abscess that arises under the fingernail of the hand or foot, or perhaps it arises in other places;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and when it becomes infected and one takes no notice, then the abscess grows, and they grow and burst until they reach the root of the nail, and perhaps they burst all the way;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and comes the corrosion to the bone, so that it causes a stinking pain, and the head of the shoulder is swollen with two lumps, and the colour is green-blue.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have described in the previous section, and the treatment is not effective, then you should cut away all the excess tissue that has accumulated beneath the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	Cautery is a great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and if the nail presses into the flesh, and starts to grow in, you should cut the nail underneath so that it lifts up from the flesh, and carefully and gently peel off the dead skin, then put on potent and corrosive medications to remove all of it;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the wound until it heals.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it out and treat the wound, because as long as the corrupt bone remains, it cannot heal;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if you see the joint become corrupted, cut it out in an L-shape as described before, then treat the wound until it heals;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is wild, and biting, and it feels great pain, then you must heal it first.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	then cut the fingernail of the spasm with a diagonal cut, being careful that the cutter does not go all the way to the flesh underneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, place something on it which soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of a deaf person's hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two toenails that sometimes grow on the hands of some people by chance are all fleshy, and sometimes they have bones in them, and sometimes they have nails, and some grow from the root of the joint where the nail grows from one of the toes.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	Those nails that grow from the nailbed do not move, but those that grow from the joint of the toe sometimes do.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The cutting of the fleshy one is thus:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cut it at its root with a broad knife.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	Those that grow from the root of the joint are painful to treat:
si te tien dou coper.	if you hold it still.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For one who is born with a hernia in the navel at the back, you should first scrape away the flesh roundly up to the bone, then scrape the bone to an appropriate size for that, then heal it until it is well.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joints that come together come by birth, or by wound, or by burn, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	You must cut the nail, so that the toe can heal according to its natural shape;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then place between two tents or wet cloths in rose oil, so that they do not adhere;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you place between two pieces of thin felt, until the skin is healed, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If a person with a sore palm comes to you, then treat that wound as it should be treated.
des vils	of the evil one
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Veins are large tubes wrapped in membrane filled with melancholic superfluities that come from various parts of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and more often happens to those who walk on foot and work and carry loads, than to others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should administer to him an emetic, and then the basil drink.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	There are two methods of using the fire cautery:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	one is to scorch them, and draw out the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other method is that you open a vein, and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The incision is done in this way:tu traies un petit coup, et puis li traies le sang noir qui y ad
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	you make a small cut, and then draw out the black blood that rises up from it. First warm the leg with very hot water until the veins become subtle, then straighten the leg from above the thigh to the joint below the knee;
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then cut the vein in one, two or three places, with a large incision, then press and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, as much blood as the patient can endure;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then the scabs, and he is commanded to dye himself with meats mixed with black soot;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and recommences the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, which is harmful to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The remedies for him are as follows:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	He raises the leg of the patient, if there is much hair on it, then he puts it in a bath and pours hot water over the leg until it turns red and opens the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you do not have a bath, then heat it over the fire, and then press down on the vein from above at the knee, or in the part below at the ankle;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then open the skin at the toenail, and scrape the vein from each side, until it appears when you feel it;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and you will see it red and black, and when it enters into the skin it seems like a white string;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	then pour the water beneath it, until it is raised from the skin, and then gently at the edge, then cut in another place above it three times.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then scorch the skin above the vein until it appears, then lift it with a tweezers, as you did before, and cut at another edge, as you did before.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	then cut another slit, or several if you need to, then lift it and cut at the toe of the foot, then pull and lift up to the second slit.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then pull it out from slit to slit until it is completely extracted, then cut it.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and if you cannot pull and lift it, then insert a strong doubled thread with a needle, tie it, pull it out, and pour water beneath the vein, turning your hand from side to side until it comes out.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and be sure it does not burst, for if it bursts, one cannot milk or lift it, and the patient suffers harm.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	and when you have milked it completely, then place on the site of the wound wool moistened with wine and rose oil;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it until it heals.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the vein is constricted and twisted and enveloped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it twisting, but do not burst it;
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and milk it as we have previously said.Et se li vis est rompiez ou fends en quere de
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	And if the vein is broken or split in the process of removing the iron, the shape of the iron should be curved, and it should not burst the vein;
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and it should be thick, for if it were slender, it would burst the vein; but it should be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is found in the legs, in hot areas where no herbs or trees grow, and in dry land where there is no moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	And sometimes it occurs elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens from the pustules that emerge under the skin, just as snakes and worms emerge inside the body, between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this wound are that a great inflammation comes in the leg, then the color changes, and the wound begins to come out, as well as the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the head is exposed, you must wrap it around with a piece of linen three and a half to four fingers wide, and tie it, leaving the linen hanging down the leg. And every time it dislocates, wrap it again around the linen and the wound.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	And if it is too long, cut off a part of it and wrap around what remains, but do not cover the root until it is all dislocated.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	Because if you cover it, it will go back into the flesh and cause an abscess and pustules at that spot, and great illness.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	that thing must be treated little by little until the end, and nothing remains in the body;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	and sometimes this vein, when it is treated, reaches from the palm of the hand to the elbow, or from the palm to the armpit, and once a man came to me whose vein reached from the palm to the armpit; and when you cut it, insert the needle or probe, and pierce it to the bottom, so that everything comes out.
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	and empty the matter inside, and apply healing medications for several days, then treat it as you would an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And sometimes this vein has branches, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot, or in the foot, and there is a lot of bleeding, and from it rain falls.
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Treat it therefore as we have said before.Et li chiés de l’ajutoire est issue et retentue li
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that grow between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is called "cow disease" in our land because it often affects cows, and it is a small worm that grows between the skin and flesh, traveling throughout the body, ascending and descending, and one feels it as it moves from member to member until it breaks through the skin where it goes, and exits.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is caused by an excess of humors, like worms and snakes and roundworms and tapeworms in the belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	and one doubts its maliciousness because when it travels through the body and ascends to the head, if it reaches the eye, it can enter and destroy the eye;
et ceu avient maintes fois.	and that happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it traveling through the body, one cannot stop it until it leaves:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	so you must tie the area above and below with a strong string tightly, then cut it out and if the worm is deep in the flesh, and you cannot extract it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm it does is that it runs in the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming near the eye, grab the eyelash firmly underneath and pull it out.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and one should use the patient's body purification with medicinal solutions to draw out the bad humors, and wash with meats that cause swelling.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain which comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This disease is called 'visceritis' in our land, and it is a pain that comes in one member, and then moves from member to member;
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and I have seen what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling on the vein of her elbow;
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and soon after, I saw it rising up her shoulder like a worm, quickly and brightly like silver when it moves from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	the pain leaves that area and settles in the shoulder, and then a little later it runs through the whole body until it reaches the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then it started twisting around the body, just as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was very surprised how she moved from limb to limb like that, because I had never seen this illness behave in that way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	Nevertheless, I have seen many whose pain moved from one place to another, but I did not see it in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and I thought that it was because a woman's body is dry and their veins are exposed, and because this windiness is forced out;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and they did not experience it according to this reason in those who were sick, who had moist bodies and relaxed veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you see this disease being treated, and the patient feels the pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then apply pressure above and below, and then press gently until that forced windiness leaves the area;
et cauterize le leu;	and cauterize the area;
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	and if you do not see it yourself, then the doctor who treats wind-related ailments, as with foul-smelling pills, and serapium pills, and similar remedies.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, depending on their appearance and the place in the body where they land.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity of their appearance is that some have large points, some small, some have heads, and some are bald;
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	Some have two angles, some have tongues, and some have pieces;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	And those that break in a limb break in two ways:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	Or in a principal member it breaks, like the brain, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members. Or it breaks in a subsidiary member, like the limbs:
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it therefore breaks in any of these members, and the signs of death that I will tell you about appear:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	Then you should beware of extracting this arrow, for death comes after in many cases;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	And when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not entirely out, then pull it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of a trepanation wound is when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, and the syphilis breaks through the skull, and there is scotomata and pain and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of blood:
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and perhaps it comes out through the nose or ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps they lose their speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and from the wound comes white moisture resembling pus, and also like blood-clots;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if this sign appears to you, then stop the treatment and pull out the arrow if it is still inside.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The signs of a wound to the heart are that it is near the left breast, and it feels as if it were pierced into a hard object, not bleeding;Et quant li saiettes chiet entre le col et li poitrins, et s’il est enflammiez et gonfliez, si est grant dolor.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and perhaps the patient becomes mute like the fowl, and turns pale, and there is dark blood, and coldness and cold sweat, and syncope:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	then you will know without doubt that death has occurred.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow wound that never leaves the body is foam without pain, emerging from the wound, and a swollen throat, and the patient's colour changing, and gasping for breath and seeking the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrow pierces the scrotum, it is near the testicles;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and there is great pain and sighing;
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and all the limbs move from the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrow pierces the heart or stomach, by chance something indigestible may come out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow pierces the belly and nothing comes out through the intestines but feces, there is no hope for a cure nor for extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrow pierces the bladder, and the urine flows out in a jet and there is bleeding, and the patient feels great pain:
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	then you will know that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, armpit, spine of the back, buttock, thigh, and leg, and similar members, are safe according to various dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or artery and is not poisonous, as I will tell you so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a man that an arrow hit him in the jaw, in the root of the teeth:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I probed it, and drew it out from under the ear, and he was healed without any numbness.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And take an arrow and shoot it into the fat of the eye below the eyelid, and the arrow was wrapped around, and one could only touch its point towards the shaft, and the arrow was as big as a Turkish bow, all of iron, without ears.
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	the games were healthy, and no bad accidents happened.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And take an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I shaved the beards, and subtly shot it so that I hit him, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And take an arrow from a man who has it in his head or belly, and think that he will die;
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and after thirty days, his condition did not improve;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut into the arrow, and pushed it out, and he had no bad accident.Et ot un oileier qu’ot une saiette en la cuisse, si com il li traioit la saiette;
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a person whom an arrow has hit in the back, and the wound is closed over;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and the arrow remains inside him, and his natural functions are undisturbed and he experiences no discomfort in any of his natural processes.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And you see another man whom an arrow has hit in the face, and the wound is closed over;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and he remains thus without suffering great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	and many other similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And treat an arrow that has hit the king's son in the head, and is lodged in his brain, and he is slightly nghiêng to the right;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the arrow is fully embedded.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called to treat him after three days had passed.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I examined him thoroughly, and I did not feel anything;Et si vis I home cui il chut un saiette en la paume de sa main dreite, et ne demora li
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt pricking and pain beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was from the tip of the arrowhead. I placed a soothing and digestive poultice on the area, so that the ears would not swell;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and I saw the head of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I applied the poultice for several days, and the wound healed quickly, and the patient felt the arrow inside his nose for a long time;
et il le me dist.	and he told me about it.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I applied corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it healed, and I tested it, and felt the tip of the arrow which was protruding out;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then, I adjusted the opening of the wound using that corrosive medicine until the head of the arrow became visible to me;
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and let him transgress the terms for 4 months, and then tear open the wound that I clamped with tweezers, and pull from one side and the other, and it cannot come out;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	therefore I did not cease to use instruments and invent ways, until one day I took the tweezers well-made, according to what his form will be in the end of this chapter, as I drew it out and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And let them judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it therefore, and the wound was closed, and the patient was completely healed.And in a similar case, I found an arrow in the shoulder of a man who had been struck by an arrow through the neck, which had entered below the ear, and gone out at the shoulder
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your care upon what I do not say, for the book cannot encompass everything;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	but the wise masters consider well very little, and what is present and lacking to them, they devise new work, and new instruments, in the descent of strange things which come about in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows grow in the limbs where they are stuck in two ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	either through the place where they enter, or through another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which goes out through the place where it entered is an arrow entering into the flesh, and sometimes goes out immediately.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not go out immediately, leave it until the flesh around it becomes rotted away, and loosen the exit;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and if it is stuck in the bone, and cannot go out, then leave it for several days, and move it every day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it will come out, and if not, then pierce around it with a very thin instrument until the flesh around it is widened, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the skull, and goes right through to one of the membranes of the brain, and any of the accidents that I have mentioned appear to the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	don't pull it out, but let it be until it is even with the skin for a few days, for if the arrow pierces to the brain, that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is lodged only in the bone and does not reach the brain, and the patient remains for several days without any bad signs, then try to extract it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is pierced deeply and cannot be pulled out, then apply cauterization around it as I have told you:
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	then clean the wound until it is healed.Et s’il est encores maladiz, si covient qu’il soit baigne en l’
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is lodged in the body so that it cannot be seen, then it must be sought throughout the body;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, pull it out with an appropriate instrument;si ne le puet demorer en li cors, si la laisse tant qu’elle soit igals, et met
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and if you cannot due to the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then open it as much as the wound is large;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs that hold it in place, then cut away the flesh where it is stuck on both sides as much as you can, and then bend or twist the barbs of the arrow until you can pull it out;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and be careful not to break the arrow, so that you can pull it out more easily.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot extract it in one go, then leave it until the surrounding area becomes swollen; then pull it out, for extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the bleeding is too profuse, then follow what we have said about stopping the bleed in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	and beware of cutting into a nerve or vein, and use any means you can to pull out the arrow safely, quickly or slowly, gently or forcefully;
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	and place the patient in the position he was in when the arrow struck him, for that is the greatest aid you can provide; and if you cannot, then place him according to the signs that the stars show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	Arrows that come from another direction, or where some of it protrudes, or the skin is swollen in that spot, either visibly or felt by touch:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	cut above it, as high as the tweezers can reach, and then extract it:
si saut fuer maintenant.	if it is a through-and-through wound.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is stuck in the bone, rotate your hand rapidly, so that it goes into the bone and widens the opening, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot be extracted, then leave it for now and try again later to extract it;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if there is an arrowhead in it, push it all the way through;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if the shaft is short, and you intend to administer a tourniquet, then place the arrowhead into the hole of the instrument;
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and then pushed out, and if the arrow is lodged in the head, he pushes the instrument in point first to ease extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	If the arrow has touched, you must cut away all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, and then cure the wound as it should be done.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow hits the leg or foot or belly or bladder or side, and it is close to the surface, and you can cover it with your hand, then cup it;
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and be careful not to cover the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then cut the wound if necessary;
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and treat the wound until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tongs used to treat arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and here is the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	There are many ways to do this:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the feathered end is also like the feathers on an arrow, to catch and stick to the tip of the arrow, as shown in the illustration.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the tongs for pushing and probing if it's there:
des voinnes dou cors communes	veins of the common body:
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	There are 31 types of veins from which one can bleed, and in the head there are 16 of them, namely:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	Two veins located behind the ears, called the "two hares";
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the two arteries which are in the two temples visible;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and the veins that are in the lids of the eyes, which are called "aspirers";
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is in the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is at the top of the nose;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two windpipes which are in the neck;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are above the lips at the mouth, and they are the veins that are called "augerich";
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the two veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins which are commonly used for bleeding are five in each arm:La premiere qui est apeleee  «Veine de la Main» qui se prend ad le coté del coeur
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	The first which is called the "Vein of the Hand" which is taken from the side of the heart, one is the cephalic, and it is from the left side, and people call it the "vein of the head";La seconde qui est appellee  «Veine de l’avant-bras»
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	and the means is called "fasting", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic, and the common people call it "vein of the heart";
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and the basilic is on the right side, and the common people call it  "vein of the belly", and it is above the sacrum, and it is the one that opens clearly above the scrotum.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And  the salvator is the vein between the little finger and ring finger, and has two branches:
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the leg and foot there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	one is under the crook of the scrotum on the left side, and the second is at the ankle on the right side;and the third is:
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein that is called "thigh", which is at the ankle of the other side;and all these three veins come together and form a single vein, which goes up along the inside of the leg:
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg there are three veins below them.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The bleeding of the veins that are behind the ears helps with old cataracts and with migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	and the quality of the bleeding is as I told you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth;
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	then press on the neck of the patient with your thumb, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places under the head;
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	hold them there and where you feel the pulse below your finger, press inwards;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	then take the lance and pierce below the vein right to the bone, then lift your hand up along the vein, and press and pierce through the skin and the vein for two fingers length, and let the blood out until you see enough;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then strain and bind it, until it is healed
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already spoken of incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The bleeding of the two arteries that are in the temples is useful for old migraines, and sore eyes, and constant tearing, and for the eyes of those with ague;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the qualities of the bleeder are as I have said:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	and the patient should stretch his neck so that the two veins can be seen clearly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	feel for the pulse in your groin, and then sign with a cross;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	then lightly cut the vein at the top of your index finger, and insert the lance underneath, and open the vein at the top, and let the blood flow according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then loosen the bandage, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then place cotton on it;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and then form a blister, and leave it until it is healed;
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and we have spoken of them and their treatment and extraction in the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The bleeding from the vein on the forehead is just as good for ancient diseases of the face, and for migraine, and redness.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	And its quality is such that the patient turns his neck until the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the instrument which is called "digging", of which here is the form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And put the point on the vein, and press with your hand, or something else, and let the blood issue according to the amount you want;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then tie off the vein, and let it heal and sometimes use a wide flame.Et s’il est necessaire qu’on le remette a leu, tu resaisies la voinne;
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	Nevertheless, the flames should not be too fierce;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	and the blood flows sideways, for the bone is close by, and the flame may break it when it is thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The bloodletting of the two veins that are in the two temples helps with headaches, and eye problems, and facial diseases;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the nature of their bloodletting is such that the patient turns his neck by twisting it with a bandage, as described earlier;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then bloodlet, and let the cut be deep, but the flame not too wide, for there is no bone there.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flame is thin, it may break;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	then let the blood flow, as much as you need, and then bind it up tightly with a thread.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The bleeding of the vein in the nose is good for nosebleeds and sudden fainting spells, and for facial illnesses such as the migration of redness and bumps that appear on the face, especially when they are chronic.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	And the quality of this bleeding is that you should squeeze your patient's neck, then pinch his nose with your left hand, and take a long, thin flame and insert it into the lip space between the two nostrils because the vein does not open well, and the blood will now begin to flow.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	And do not go in too deeply, just let the blood flow according to your need, then ligature it for one night, because it is quickly restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	This is how you make the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	Bleeding the two veins helps with throat constrictions, and with many illnesses, and with swelling, and with scurvy, and with herpes and ulcers.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the qualities of the healing are such that the patient stretches his neck below one and then the other, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	and the master stands above the patient's head, and the patient lies on a bed, then the long vein is cut widely, then the blood is bled moderately, or as much as is necessary;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	then do the same to the other vein, then loosen the bandage, and gently squeeze the veins, so that the patient is not strangled;
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and leave it until the morning, so that the wound heals.
de la sainie des leivres	of bleeding from the lips
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	Bleeding from the veins of the lips above helps with cold in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and splitting of the lips, and toothache and pain in the jaw.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the qualities of the healing are such that the patient sits in front of you, and stretches his neck as I have said;Et tu sieces sus li chief, et li malaides sus I siege ou la lit, puis saine la voinne dou lonc un poc largement, et trai dou sang tempreement ou tant com mestier est.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	Then do the same to the other vein, then loosen the bandage, and gently squeeze the veins, so that the patient is not strangled;And let it be until the morning, so that the wound heals.And the qualities of the healing are such that the patient sits in front of you, and stretches his neck as I have said;You stand above the head, and the patient sits or lies on the bed, then cut the long vein widely, and bleed the blood moderately, or as much as is necessary.Then turn around, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left,
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	Take therefore one of each, and if you do not know them and are in doubt, take the largest of each, and do likewise to the two veins above and below, for it is the same manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	And the qualities of bleeding under the tongue: have the patient stick out his tongue and grip it from below with your left hand; then take a sharp knife and cut both sides of the frenulum, and cut straight through until you reach the muscle, and then pull the tongue down so that it hangs down. Then hold the tongue steady with your left hand and grasp the frenulum with your right hand, pulling it up towards the nose as far as you can, while cutting with a knife under the root of the tongue; when you have finished cutting, let go with your left hand and with your right pull it up towards the nose until it comes away. Then take a piece of wool and put it over the wound to stop the bleeding, and let him spit out the blood that has collected in his mouth.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The bleeding of the veins below the tongue aids after the bleeding of the cephalic vein, and it is for the narrowing of the throat, and for diseases of the gullet, and for diseases of the mouth.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the qualities of the bleeder are such that he should cut between his fingers in front of the sun, and raise his tongue, and look under each side for a black vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Bleed therefore one and then the other, and do not go too deep, for beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the neck, from which one bleeds commonly, are bled in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	where it pricks at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they grow.
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and are wide and narrow according to the width and tightness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame martin is very renowned, and it is broad as you can see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open flat veins filled with thick, visible blood, and that contain thick, troubled blood;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the shape of the flame olive:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and is more pointed and is for bleeding subtle veins, where there is subtle yellow blood.The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps diseases that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and the surgeon must bleed it, and he must be careful of the artery that is underneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if it pierces the artery, and blood flows out, then it must be staunched, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and the flame should not be pierced, but cut like an onion.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basil doesn't open clearly, then you must strain it and change to another.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	or you want a vein from him, or you heal in his place the vein in the arm:
elle apert manifestement;	it opens clearly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and the cup to the flame extinguishes, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you want to find the place of bleeding, then you must stretch out the arm, and touch the place until you feel the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the place with ink, and then tie up the arm, and cup the vein with the flame extinguished;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	and be careful not to pierce an artery when you see the place puffed up, for it is an artery:
eschui la donques.	avoid it therefore.Et si li poulz ne poigne en la sain
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if the pulse does not beat in the bleeding, and you see it rise up as high as urine from a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is arterial blood:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	So you quickly, and put your finger over the wound for a long time, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, which often happens.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	bind the arm and leave it like that, and don't move it, so that the patient does not feel any pain;
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be careful not to move it until the bleeding stops.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if the wound won't stop bleeding and you don't have any medicine, cut open the artery where it is bleeding from the most, because that's where the blood is coming out from.
et estainche li sans.	Then stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	Take a piece of bark from an oak tree, split it in half, and use one half to bind the wound tightly until the next day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	If the bleeding stops, that's good;si li sans ne s’estainchie pas, adonques lie li bras, et
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If it doesn't stop, then bind the arm tightly, and if that doesn't work either, then use one of the powders that stops bleeding, as we said before.Et s’il adonques li sans ne vait point, et ne lie
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the bandages are not wrapped in various positions due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The bleeding of the vein in the middle helps that it draws blood from the head above and the body below, because it is composed of basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and the surgeon must be careful not to pierce too deeply and to find the nerve below, and if he pierces it too much the nerve will inflame and the wound will become infected and may not heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	and this nerve often opens up, and if it does not open in some people due to its subtlety, you must treat it with the anaesthetic tool;et li nerf de la mainne apert a la coze de la piere, et si covient qu’on le saine del sainement de l’estrument, et s’il ne poait gueres estre sans estainche, il convient qu’il fie
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and avoid the nerve at your own risk.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, they cut it from the long one.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The surgery on the cephalic vein helps, drawing blood from the head, and helping the eyes.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is best to lance with an olive-wood or myrtle-wood point, for it is the safest of all veins, for there are no nerves or arteries beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Nevertheless, one must seek the lightest vein, and not hurt anything if one misses the first time, and try again;
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and by chance, some people's veins swell up when they miss the first time, but it doesn't hurt them.Si est raide ou dur, si covient sainier as deux flasques, car li dur corps demere plus qu’on ne fait la voinne
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the bloodletting depends on your thoughts.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you should know about lancing is that it is not done to cure illness, but rather to prevent diseases from coming;et por ce covient sainier la venie qui est plus pres li malaides, car par celle venie que le sang s’en va, il revient a la santeit.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	and the bleeding should be done in one of the three veins that are in the neck:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	that is to say, cephalic, fast, and basilic;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should bleed in the beginning of spring, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of repletion are apparent;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	and one should bleed on the first day or third day, after two hours or three of the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The bleeding administered for illnesses has no set time, but whenever the need arises, day or night, at all times and in all seasons;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and one should not bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor women carrying a child before the fourth month up to the seventh month.Quant la maladie est en la teste et en la fumee de la teste;
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should the very old be bled who have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when one wishes to be bled in any manner, one should first cleanse the bowels with a mild clyster if they are holding back much feces so that the veins do not draw harmful excesses from the intestines into the principal limbs;Car la fiens retentée, par son poids et sa pesance, attire li sang de les membres en bas vers la fumee de la teste:
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	He who is too fat from eating meat, or who is drunk, as much as he may be, nor a person with dropsy will not heal.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and if one is made better after colic, vomiting, diarrhea, and frequent intercourse with a woman, and from exertion, staying up late, and fasting, and that which comes from the use of weapons or from the body;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then subtly alter the humors, if they are thick, through food and drink and medicine, if you have the power to do so;
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	then enter the bath, if nothing else weakens him, to alter the blood, and heal from the vein around the third, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and beware of exertion, piercing, and luxury, and similar things that day;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	and be calm and cheerful, and let the healer stand higher than the one being healed, and rub the arm 2 or 3 times, then tighten the bandage above the wound, for if it is too loose or too tight, it will not work;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the area with your hands, until the veins swell, and you can feel them;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	then moisten the cautery with a little old oil, then put your finger from your left hand onto that vein underneath where you want to cauterize, so that the vein does not burst and split when you touch it.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	Because there are veins that flow like cords when cauterized, and some are filled with wind, so that when you touch them with the cautery, the cautery draws back and cannot open the vein, and thus it is with some.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	And if he opens the vein, but the wound is too narrow for that, then the cauterizer must be skilled in such matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein opens the first time, that is good;and if not, then you must touch it with a hot stone, as will now be said.Et si il ne fu
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	if not, then begin again a little lower than the place where there is swelling.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the arm is swollen and the patient is in doubt, then leave it for a day or two, and do not bind the arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	by chance there will be pus-filled abscesses.
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	do not enter the bath, then begin the bleeding again if she wishes;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the vein is small, open it carefully and gently in that same vein directly;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	and work on it gently, until the arm swells.
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	for this often happens when the vein is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the vein swollen, do not begin bleeding again, but put a little linseed oil on it, for it lightens the body of blood, and in this place the oil is medicine.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and thus administer the oil mixture to each wound that you treat veins with, to stop the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	and this same mixture makes a poultice and bandage for them when one puts it on the spot;
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	if subtly the blood escapes and is split when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if there comes great abscesses, which often happen, especially when it is not treated before the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and put damp sponges in warm water on the spot and hold them for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and you must do this after the flow of blood from the vein, and if it remains on the spot for some days, there will be no harm;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see anything of aloe or myrrh mixed with juice of hellebore, or similar, put it on the spot.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And many times abscesses and appearances occur at the opening of the basilic vein:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	put your hand over it, and if you find the place soft to the touch, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Therefore, avoid putting anything on it of what we have described, for perhaps it is close to an artery;
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but make a dry poultice to harden the area, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to its quantity and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it turns red;
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thin;
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And for one who is full and bloated, and needs bloodletting, they should make a larger wound, and the flames should be wide;
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and for the weak, do the opposite, and one must bleed them little by little often, and they should be bled by cutting diagonally, not by pricking;
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this bleeding method is safe from blood loss and nerve damage, and it is better than bleeding the long or the large vein.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And for those whose body needs bleeding, one should give them moist bread in pomegranate juice;
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	If they are hot-tempered, let them eat moist bread with pomegranate juice three or four times before bleeding. And if of a cold temperament, let them eat moist bread with syrupy muzel, or with aromatic honey syrup and spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, and perfumed syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	If he faints after losing a lot of blood, then he should drink warm broth and subtle scented syrup, and use the other remedies we mentioned in the chapter on syncope for opening a vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to empty his arm and bleed again, then when he is weakened by a large bleeding, he should bleed a little at a time according to the amount of his continued strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wishes to open their arm after the first bleeding, and they have strong pulses, then heal for .vii. hours after the first bleeding, or after the new hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wishes to bleed from another part, then they should bleed on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For they have a lot of blood inside their body which is hot and causes fever;
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	if one must draw a great quantity, and widen the hole so that it is cut by the lance;
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	then you must examine all the signs of healing, and place your hand over the pulse when it is healing, so that death does not come to the lance-wound, and this happens many times when the surgeon is negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it must not be, when you see the arm being released and blood emerging a second time, and the hole is closed, that you press directly on it;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	nor if it is crooked, that it extends the arm suddenly, for that would be bad;puis que li fies la cure a la fin, et demourra en leu de pameson, si li sainieres ne fu pas negl
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	then you must perform the treatment at the end, and let it remain in place until it heals a second time; but if the surgeon was negligent,
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	or you may touch it with the tip of the flame, until the frozen blood at the wound's entrance melts, and place a little salt in water, and press gently on it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, leave it and don't constrict it until the abscess is drained.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it's necessary to let blood a second time, then bleed in the same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	Veins in the arm are bled in the area of the vein near the shoulder because it is closer to the heart.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of healing is for the patient to put his hand in hot water until the wart turns red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then let it be cut slightly, so that the vein appears well, then heal it immediately from the inside, not from the wide nor the long;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let the slit be wide, and let it be healed near the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot come out, then put the hand back in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough;
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is in summer, then do not put the hand back in hot water, for it is warmer in summer than in winter;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the healing of this vein is safer than any other vein, that there is no artery or nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The healing of the salvation of the right hand is for all diseases of the liver, and this is the way:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	hold the hand, and pour hot water on it until the vein is swollen, if one can see it.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if it is cut across, and you bandage it firmly from all sides, then it will not be painful.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	do not go too deep, because the nerves are completely stripped of flesh underneath; and then put the hand back in hot water if the blood has congealed in the wound, so that it can flow out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as necessary, put oil and silk on the vein to heal quickly, and do this for each vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The bleeding in the left hand is good for the disease of the mumps, and do everything just as I have told you about the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The sauce of the sophia is good for all diseases that are under the body, such as diseases of the kidneys, and retention of fluids, and diseases of the intestines, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And in terms of how to treat it, the patient should put his foot in hot water and rub the vein until it breaks, and tie something around the ankle joint;
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and if the vein is at the ankle, there will be many veins going up the foot.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	So treat it in the widest vein, or at the ankle, whichever is easiest to access.Et si li voinne ne puet pere en aigue chaude, et se li sans est dedenz la plaie congele
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you heal it on the foot, then beware of the nerves that are underneath, and heal it across as well as upwards by cutting.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and let the flames be extinguished.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the pus cannot come out, then put the foot into water, and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the healing fails the first time, then try again a second time on top of it, for the wound is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	do not doubt about nerve, as we have said, and thus do with the other foot similarly.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The site of the sciatic vein is at the ankle, and its remedy is for pain in the hip, when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the nature of its healing is that the patient goes into the bath, and twists above the ankle three times, for otherwise the vein does not open;
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	and if it opens, then heal it in all the ways that you can, and by cutting across;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is better to cut than to burn, for the wound is safe, and it is very painful for many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not believe this, then test any vein that opens on the front or back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and be careful with the nerves.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	And let blood flow until you see it, then untie the ligature and place cotton over it and compress it;
ele est maintenant sanee.	it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of cupping glasses
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Cupping glasses are made from horns, or brass, or glass;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	and cupping is performed according to two methods:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	either by cutting and drawing blood, or without cutting.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this cupping without cutting is performed in two ways:ou par cautere, ou par foyre;
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	either with fire, or without fire; it can be done with all fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	and cupping that is performed by cutting and drawing blood is done in 14 places on the body, of which one is entirely on the head;
et li autres est emmi le col;	and the others are within the neck;
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and the others are on both sides of the neck;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the cupping glass under the chin;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the cupping glasses on the shoulders;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the cupping glass above the hips;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the cupping glasses within both arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the cupping glasses on both legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the cupping glasses on the ankles;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and bloodletting does not treat any vein, except for small veins that are scattered throughout the body, and because of this it does not weaken one in the slightest, as is done with phlebotomy;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it must not be administered, nor at any heat or fever, in any disease that comes from fullness, until the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if, due to necessity or habit, bloodletting must be done, then we do it every hour at the beginning and end of the month, and throughout all times of the year.Et si li corps n’est vuidiez par ventose, on ne le doit mie ventoser en tel tens, si com qu’il soit vuidiez;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	because there are those who, when they need to fart, feel great pressure.
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and some experience congestion and redness in their face, head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and some bleed from their mouth, have a swollen tongue, and taste blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and some dream, and see through the night terrible things and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially if it is during the month, we command them to fast after 3 hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The bleeding from the nose helps the headache ... that comes to the eyes, and it is not good for this to happen after the evacuation of the whole body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and this venting is in the place of bleeding from the head, and it is not good for those who are of a cold complexion to do it, or who have a catarrh, because it does them great harm;et si convient qu’il soit aprés le sainie de la Cephalique;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and for this reason the elderly should not use it, nor those with serious illnesses.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who heal often become blind, and because of this, one must place the cupping glass a little lower down due to the fear of blindness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	Ventilation is in the neck, for the relief of headache and toothache, and for constriction of the chest, and for splitting of the channel of the stomach, and for all kinds of swelling and bloating.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it should not be applied too strongly, as if it holds too tightly, it causes injury to the stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	Ventilation at the second rib of the neck helps with headaches, and eye pain and inflammation, and constriction, and dental pain, and is in the place for relieving toothache.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and you must instruct the operator to express his hand while putting it on, so that he does not squeeze the artery and cause bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	Windings underneath the chin help with mouth diseases, and gum decay, and similar illnesses that occur in the mouth;
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and cause suppuration between the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Ventilation of the armpits is good for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	Windings on the sides help as much as three veins in the arm, because they attract blood from those large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the surgeon not to go too deep, because the area is bare of flesh and contains nerves and arteries underneath;
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The cupping glass placed on the buttocks helps with hemorrhoids and diseases underneath, and it should be large, made of copper, and good at drawing;
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	And if it were subtle, it would break;
et i fai grans plaies.	and it makes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	Cupping glasses on the legs heal very well, because they attract blood from the whole body, and help with long-standing pains in the kidneys, and the womb, and the bladder, and bring back period flow;
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and are located in the two sockets, and in the two ankles, and nevertheless they weaken the body after long use, and cause paralysis in many ways.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The way to apply the cupping glass is that you first place it empty, and suck gently, and place it firmly, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing so until you see the area red and swollen, and the color of blood appears.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	Then heat it, and put on the cupping glasses again, taking care to observe the condition of the body, as there are those with very thin skin and clear pores.
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	It is necessary to pierce only once, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and a little deep;and if the blood does not come well, heat again.
et suce legierement.	and suck gently.If the blood does not come well, heat again.Et s
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to pierce twice:first you make a wound wide and a little deep, and when the blood comes, you pier
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	the first time to open the path of thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if the blood is very thick, then it is necessary to pierce a third time;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	and when we want to draw little by little, we only do it once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we want a lot of blood, we start over again often;
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and if the blood is thick, we pierce deeply and the veins are pierced suddenly, and it is necessary for those who have thick and tough skin, and who have narrow pores, that you anoint the places where the leeches will be placed with an astringent oil and a dissolving oil:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in the head, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or squash seed oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in the liver, use watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the swelling is large and cold, take oil of amaranth, or of balsamite, or aniseed oil, and similar oils.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if those to whom one heals have soft flesh and wide pores, no oil should be put on them, but they should be washed after cupping with rosewater, or cold water, or mulberry water, or pumpkin water, or porcelain water, or similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have a lot of moisture, if they rise from garlic, or myrrh water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have large swollen areas rise from old wine, or from pure water, or from a decotion of anise or camomile, or other similar things;
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	and it is not appropriate to bleed by cupping before the bath or in the bath itself, but one or two hours after the bath.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and he should not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary for him to be careful, both when he is being cupped and when he has been cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And beware if the person being bled is choleric, and if the blood is too thin and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	then he should eat cool things like pomegranates, endives, lettuce with garlic, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and drink mead, and wine mixed with vinegar, and moist foods.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those of a cold complexion should eat honey syrup, and moderate old wine, and drink mead, and drink mead, and eat small birds and pigeons;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and on the day he is bled, he must drink more than eat.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give some men garlic or musk before or after bleeding to strengthen the main organs;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and dilute the wine, but those who are hot-tempered should not drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The ventouses that are used without burning are those that are placed over the liver, and the mumps, and the scurvy, and over the belly, the armpits, the thighs, and the groin, because these members cannot bear to be burned, and it is only done to draw blood from one member into another, as we put them on breasts when babies suckle.
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	to remove the viscosity that is in a member, just like we put ventouses over the belly and armpit to reduce the swelling of the member.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and removes the pain when there is a stone or tumor, and by its attractive power it removes the tumor or pushes the stone from its place.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	and similarly, when placed on the liver and on the abdomen when there is retained wind, and these cupping glasses are administered empty in order to suck only slightly.
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water in which suitable herbs have been boiled; in such cases the water is used only once.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the cup to be administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	It is two fingers wide and half a palm deep, and on the side near the middle it has a small hole, just big enough to push through a needle; it should be made of brass, smooth in front so as not to hurt the patient when placed on the body.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	In the middle it has a cross-bar of brass or iron, to hold a candle, and they come in various sizes according to the sickness and age of those who use them. They can be large or small.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	Because children's bellows are different from adults', and thin people's from fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one should thus place this bellows on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	take the candle of wax or the linen, and place it inside the bellows through the tube which is inside the bellows, so that the flame is at the bottom of the bellows and does not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it on the limb, and your fingers should be on the hole that we have mentioned, so that when one wishes, the vapor goes out, and then remove the bellows;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and use the linen just as before, and repeat it often if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	The bellows which is used for pleurisy and all wounds has no tube or hole, but is placed on the limb only when it is full of water.
et c’est li forme:	and this is how you do it:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Leeches are not applied except in parts where cups cannot be placed due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and on bare flesh, such as ears or nose, and other similar areas;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of their use is such that when you apply leeches that are in clean, still water without any odor, they will attach themselves;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and place them in fresh water for as long as they are accustomed to it and have nothing in their bellies;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	then cleanse the vein and apply cups, then rub the limb until it turns red, and place the leeches on top;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are full and begin to bite, if it is a place where cups can be applied, then do so, for it is much better.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, then raise the area with ash, and then with water, very well, and then squeeze it out.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the bites are too close to the body of the snake, then soak a linen cloth in cold water and place it over the bite until the swelling goes down.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if there are many bites, then apply ground vitriol, or gall, and similar things, until the swelling goes down.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you can place half-peeled beans on the bite, and leave them until they turn green, this will stop the swelling immediately.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you need more of it, catch other snakes.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the snakes don't want to be caught, then rub the wound with fresh blood, or stab it with a needle until the venom comes out, and then place them over the bite. As soon as they smell the blood, they will start to lick it;
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see them defecating, powder some aloe and salt, or ashes, over a little, and they will stop immediately.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and is for the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear son, that the fools mock this chapter, which they have never seen in any ancient book or letter.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	And for this reason the science is strange in our land, for I never found anyone good at it;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and know nothing about it, except through the science of ancient books, and I have studied it so much that I have gained knowledge through it, and through experimentation, and through my own experience;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained in it, and have abbreviated it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I have done in the two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we should say in the prologue to this book that the subjects of the discussion and the chapters in which the sage places his understanding, and dwells upon the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or bruising affects someone, you should hurry to treat the patient from one side and the other, if nothing holds them back, as with weakness of body, or pregnancy, or old age;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	or if the weather is very hot, or too cold;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and eat cool foods, that is to say, cold games, and pheasant and rabbit meat, and do not drink any wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and do not fill yourself too much with food that fills the veins with blood, until you have suspected a hot abscess or spreading of matter in the limb;
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	if the illness returns to its first state of governance which it has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, one must feed the patient foods that promote swelling and viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, testes, pigs' feet, pig's belly, offal, fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	Because with more swelling the break will be closed more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot heal well or unite according to their nature due to the dryness of the members, nor those that are also too tender, like the bones of young children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but it does not matter, reset over the broken bone the large tendons that stretch and join the limb together, as much as it enforced like it was before;
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and do not give up on his work, and for this reason one should nourish with large amounts of food, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures come in many forms and manners.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg; and I will tell you in this chapter about all types of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture which goes to the bone, and another in puncturing, like the tip of a feather for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with a wound, and a break all over a small split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And in every way it has its own method and tool for restoration according to the memory that comes to mind;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and the fracture of the bone is known by its twisting, and it appears well on the outside, and sounds hollow when pressed with the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting nor any sound when touched, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can still have twisting, or splitting, or a small fracture.Et si li chiés est desaloiez, ou la cuisse, et ne puet demorer en son leu por cause
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You must not move it by hand, but apply the medicines that follow, and then hold it firmly but gently.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the fracture that goes into the bone, and the two parts are separated, they must now be set evenly, so that abscesses do not form.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	And if a hot abscess forms, he should leave it for one day, until the abscess is soothed.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	Then he sets it even as quickly and gently as possible, and know that the restoration of this one is easier than the restoration of that one where there is a break.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then he binds it, as appropriate, afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if there is a break in the bone, if it is in two parts, whether it is the hand or foot, or the arm, or a small limb, with two strings, or one string and the hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	And he sets the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are set right, then with all his skill, he brings the additions back into their places as he can, and guards against causing the patient injury or pain through his work.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust both heads of the bone according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And feel it by hand if it doesn't seem right:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	if you dress it nicely and don't pull or press too hard as those who bring about hot abscesses and constriction in the limb through their work, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the joint is healed, instruct the patient to not move it, not while waking, sleeping, turning, or in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and be careful that the limb is secure so that he feels no pain.Si li membres sent douleur de lor chiés des os ou de lor costes et les poingनत, si leve tant com il
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when he feels no pain, then it is not healed, and you should put it in such a position that he feels no pain;Si li membres est trop mal figurez ou trop desaloiez, si doit on le rimetre en tel ovraige qu’il soit bellement dreit et si covient le res
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and make sure it is put back straight so that no crookedness comes to it when it is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the qualities of the broken member are according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	You should know that broken members are diverse in smallness and size and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small members like arms and fingers and similar things:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	one must wrap them in soft and thin linen;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those that are large, like thigh and leg:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	one must wrap them in a wide and firm bandage, for the wide bandages embrace the whole large member and constrict it evenly all around so that there is no swelling;
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then tie light sponges around it, three or four times according to the member, and press your hand on all the bandage, then go above the dislocation and press less, so that the dislocation moves a little away from the dislocation;
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the ligament little by little, until you grip a large part of the healthy area, then take another ligament, and turn back around on the broken area;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then go to the part under the break, and grip it gently, not too hard or too softly, as we have said in the first hour above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	then put between the ligaments pieces of linen or rags, until they are all even, then tie it all above with the bandage, and then put your splints on well, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or an abscess, put something hot that soothes the abscess on top, and let it be like that for several days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	then grip the splints and have them be of half a palm width made from a branch of a willow tree, or from a palm frond, and have them be in this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but one must ensure that the star that is placed on the fracture is a little larger and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and as long as it is convenient for the limb, according to its smallness or بزرگی؛
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then press on the stars as you did at the first time, then tie a thread over them, just like you did at the first time on the fracture;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	the tighter it is, the better; if it's too tight, then loosen it a little;si li membres ne se mue
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	the member must not move, and one should use a thin thread that is not too thick nor too thin, and it should be made of soft flax;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	because if the threads are thick, as I have seen fools make their laces with twisted cords, and this is a great error, for the lace cannot be even if it is too thin, and there should not be less than two fingers of space between each star.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is weak after the stretching in their healthy arms, then place beneath them a pad of linen or other soft cloth so that they do not hurt themselves.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by a fracture and the bone is broken, I will describe the treatment for it later.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that one should not dislocate all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when a member is swollen, you should not put a splint on it for more than five or seven days, or longer depending on the security of the hot abscess.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	And here is the manner of ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations and twists:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And you should take flour that is kept on the walls of the mill, and cook it with plenty of egg, and apply this mixture, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of the plaster restoring fractures in various conditions, especially in women and small children, because it is not too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another method of plaster restoring fractures, dislocations and twists:Prend de l’huile d’olives clere et fine, et en faiz une pate avec farine dou molin, et que la
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Take clear and fine olive oil, and make a paste with flour from the mill, and take three barleycorns and ladani and inula and asafetida and gum arabic and mastic, each 10;
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	myrrh and aloe, each 5 drams;
alechil VIIII З.;	aloe wood VIIII drams;
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	grind them into powder and mix with egg yolk;
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	if the person's complexion is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition and helps to set broken bones and heals many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another way of making a plaster that helps with twisting injuries:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	Take mugwort and bee's wax, each 1/5 ounce;
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	myrrh and aloe, each 3 drachms;
acaice VI З.;	acacia gum 2 drachms;
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	armenian bole 1/5 ounce, and grind well, and simmer with water or egg white, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another recipe for an ointment for joints and bones displaced from their sockets, which relieves pain, shrinks the swelling, and promotes healing of broken bones:Pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take new lamb's wool, and boil it in vinegar and oil, and apply it to the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not restore, but it is good for soothing hot abscesses and relieving pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another recipe for an ointment which restores broken bones:Pren vismalve et mugat, ana X З.;
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take bee's wax and mugwort, each 1/5 ounce; take dried fig leaves and ground ivy leaves, and grind them together to make an ointment.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to make an ointment for the healing of broken bones and to reduce inflammation from an abscess: take equal parts honey, vinegar, and lard; boil them together and apply it to the affected area.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take equal parts of the root of viscum album, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, and wheat flour.
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Grind the ingredients together and mix with wine. If the member is hot, mix with coriander water or water and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way of making a plaster stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take equal parts of the roots of viscum album, flax seeds, borage, melilot, and sanicle, as well as violet and chamomile flowers.Grind them together and mix with wine. If the member is hot, mix with coriander water or water and apply it.
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Grind them together and mix with salt water, fresh water, or wine, depending on the temperature of the member and its condition. If the member is hot, mix with coriander water or water and apply it.Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hypocras writes in his book that one should not put anything on a broken member to restore it other than a cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and that it should be between soft and too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen says one should put on the broken member, to restore, dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take the beards and hair of humans, or bird feathers, and viscacha fur, all equally, and grind them up to make a poultice which you apply to it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	Then loosen it a little later, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain or move the bone out of place.
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	if you don't loosen it by hand after a few days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain comes to the area, or itching, with rest or swelling, hurry and loosen it, and remove the poultice immediately;
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	and take a light cloth, and a sponge from the sea, moistened in water, and apply it to the area until the itching stops and the pain is soothed;
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply lamb's wool dipped in water or rose oil, and lay it on a mat, until you are sure there is no hot abscess;
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	and relieve the inflammation of the member, and remove the pain, then restart the subtle ligature, and a little ointment, and do not constrict as strongly as before;
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and gently until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, and you need ointment and binding, then restart it in the same way as before.Et se li maux sont jai osté dou tout, et li membra sont jai sane, si ne fitz mie ren de la lieure ne de l’emplaustre; mes s’il est encores dolor, et enfleure, et roujor, si fitz ren come tu a fait avant.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if nothing comes of what we have said to the member, do not disentangle it until after 3 or 4 or 5 or 7 days.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And sometimes leave it for 20 days, according to what one sees, until the fracture is healed and the flesh approaches;
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	then restrain it more than before, and increase its meat, as I said before.
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	And if you see the place drier than necessary, know that healing cannot come;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Therefore rise it with warm water, every time you disentangle it, and every third day, and loosen the ligature a little;
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	through this work therefore shorten the limbs, and gently mend that which fools destroy, who restore the limb crookedly:
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	it is cruel, and those who work it are fearful, and I see nothing else but wearying oneself and doing it properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of the various methods of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many kinds of fractures, and various shapes, and the causes are distinct;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	for there are fractures that are made by the impact of a sword, and the collar bone is broken all the way to the hyoid bone which is below the collar bone, as a neck or a pole does;
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	and because of this that kind of fracture is called "neck-fracture".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	Or the sword strikes the bone from above without piercing it, and this kind of fracture is called  "complete";
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	and the wound of these two fractures are large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a deep impact, or a split or blow from a stone, or falling on stone, or other similar occurrences.The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if it has a penetrating fracture which approaches the membrane that is below the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound that is lodged in the bone as subtly as a hair, and the split is small, and for this reason this fracture is called "capillary";
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	and if the wound is made by stone or by falling, or in a similar way, and it drives the piece of bone down, and the place is split like the way that blacksmiths split kettles when they forge them;
si entre li piere dedens.	if the stone goes inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more often to those who have moist bones at the top, like the head of a child;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and it happens with all these types of fractures that small pieces are dislocated like tiles;
et je em parlerai en son leu.	and I will speak about it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all kinds of fractures by the distraction upon them and the examination at night, and by the foul smell that is upon it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hairline fracture is known by this: when one has exposed the bone and rubs it, the black crack appears.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fractures, take care of the accidents of illness, and if you see no evil accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of consciousness, and extension, and palpitations, and fever, and eyes popping out and turning red, and others similar in various dispositions, then it cannot heal without a doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a miraculous event, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the newborn comes to you first, and it is in winter, then you should remove the foreskin before the fourteenth day that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the spring, then you should hurry to remove the foreskin before the seventh day so that the tissue underneath the foreskin does not decay and cause the problems we have described.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the fracture of the bone reaches just up to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the fractured part thus:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and you must grab the head of the patient, and expose the bone in all ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more gently than you can, and if bleeding occurs when exposing the bone, or a pus-filled abscess, treat it with what is appropriate, and you must fill the area with soft rags soaked in rose oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and let the wound rest until the pus-filled abscess is soothed, and be sure that there is no more bleeding;
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	then begin around the bone to remove it, and this can be done in two ways:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	one way is to cut closely in front, and that is the shape:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then put on another bandage larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second way is to have many different cuts, some narrow and some wide, and they should be pointed, and made of steel;
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and work gently so you do not injure the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is thick and hard, you should pierce around it, so that you administer trepanning with borers, not so deep that it penetrates through to the brain case, and there should be a rim or ring on top of the tip, preventing the tip from penetrating beyond the bone;
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and you should have several of these, so that each one comes into its place in the thickness of the bone, so that you have borers for all parts of the skull;
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	and these are the forms of the three types of borers:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The quality for piercing around a broken bone is that you place the borer on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced;
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	then move the borer elsewhere a little later, and do this all around. Then use chisels to cut away the space between the perforations, doing this most skillfully and gently, as we have said, until you can pull out the bone with your hand or with one of the tools you have, like tweezers;
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	and make sure you do not touch the brain or the sinus.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone and made an incision, it is appropriate that you resect the membrane which is attached to the bone with some other tool resembling a scalpel, but it should be more delicate and thinner than the other scalpel;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	and if it is sticking to any small bones or any scales, gently remove them with the instrument;
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	then treat the wound as we have described earlier.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	Another method of treatment which is safer, according to Galen, is as follows:
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and he praises it highly, and it is his word we are quoting.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	First, you must uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture is open and moving; then, when you have uncovered that part, place underneath it the head of this lens-shaped instrument, which has a curved shape.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And it does not cut from one side only but has a dual cutting edge, so that the blade is facing the bone;
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	then strike gently with a small hammer all around the bone, taking care not to hit the membrane underneath.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is attached to the bone, gently loosen it, because bones can be loosened without harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the break in the bone does not go all the way through to the membrane, and the bone is only cut slightly on top, with small pieces, then you should re-examine that roughness, and remove the scales with a sharp rasp, of which you must have several quantities, to use in each place the most suitable one according to the work and the shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	First use the coarse rasps, then the finer ones, and do not stop until it is smooth.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	For each of the other hairline fractures and subtle breaks, you should treat them according to their location;
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	and this is not something that can be learned by someone who has dedicated themselves to this craft.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the sinus is exposed, you should dampen a linen cloth according to the size of the wound, moisten it in rose oil, and place it over the wound;
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	then take another cloth doubled over two or three times, moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth;
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	and do this as gently as you can so that you do not burden the ulcer, then apply it above with another piece of linen and do not pull tighter than it holds the wound.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	and leave it like that for a day or two until the abscesses are soothed, then remove it and apply remedies such as roots of lilies, and flour of beans, and incense powder, and aristology, and similar things;
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and make a powder from these things and put it on the wound, then apply remedies from moon-worshippers without biting;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	and watch that the wound is clean so that you do not leave any of the ointment or any dirt on it, for when dirt gathers on the brain's membrane and hardens, great harm comes to the patient.
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	for when one applies something biting to an ulcer, it bites from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, if any bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, without a doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if discoloration does not go away except through the medicine that one has put on it, because of its power, you must take a part of honey, and three parts rose oil, and apply it to the ulcer.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal it in the way that is appropriate, until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Know that sometimes both sides of the jaw are broken, or just one side, because there are two bones. If both sides are broken, they can be reset with a splint so they heal straight and even; if only one is broken, it must be set by itself, as will now be described.
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	The lower part is cartilaginous and does not break unless forced or twisted, then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, you must put your little finger or a tool into the jaw, and place the break inside your index finger, and hold it steady with your thumb, until the jaw returns to its natural shape. This may take several days.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do this gently, and be sure that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is above the elbow and the bone cannot be put in place, then you should place it evenly at the top of a fairly thick rod.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if there is a fracture in two parts, do the same, and be quick to restore the first day, if you can;
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscesses are healed, then put on the top of the fracture tenting with linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	Or you put the other one elsewhere, if there is a fracture there;
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	and let the tents be so thick that they fill the holes of the bone.Et li chief dou neis est si conme une gie de fer, ou une piece d’armure, ou
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some restorers say that one must wet the bandages with butter, and change them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	And the top of the bone is like a piece of iron or armor, or it does not seem to me that this is good, but it should be moistened with egg white and flour ground fine;
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	then let the tent remain, until the bone is set, and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And sometimes they put in goose feathers instead of tents, and around it a thin cloth, and the break is held, and the patient breathes through it;
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	or do what you want.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if there are abscesses on the nose while you are doing this, put cerotic ointment or cotton soaked in rose oil, or in a pouch of diaquilone.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if a boil comes, put on a plaster made of flour of wheat bran, and incense powder, cooked with egg white, then put on light tow, but do not tie it tightly;
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the fracture of the nose is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract it with appropriate instruments, then cut the wound, and treat it with warm things, healing, as with plasters and ointments appropriate to such;
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if there is no wound within the nose, then treat it with tents, and put in splints of lead, until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	from the dislocation of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is fully dislocated and there is no external wound, and only the joint is dislocated, not broken in two where the corbel sits inside, then it is easily recognized.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	If the fracture is on the right side, you must place your index finger into the mouth of the patient.
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	And if the fracture is in the left jaw, then insert your index finger from your right hand and gently push into the fracture and ease it with the other hand, making sure it is even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the joint of the jaw is displaced to one side, you should administer an extension of one part, until it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if there is movement of the teeth, or a fracture, then they should be restrained with a wire of gold or silver or silk, then place cerate on the broken jaw and over it a double drape.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And place upon the drape a heavy, well-made stele or a piece of leather the same size, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it on as tightly as you can, and instruct the patient to rest and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that it is changing shape, then loosen it on the third day, and then reset it to its proper position.Et si tu dises que li membres sont trop tiens, si deslie la nuit, et le matien remise a point, et comande a malaide qu’il ne se mueze point tant qu’il soit
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	and apply a poultice made of powdered eggs or flour mixed with water after removing the cerote.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	and if the poultice doesn't help and the condition of the patient doesn't improve, leave it until the wound heals.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	often, it heals within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if hot abscesses come, then administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is a fracture and wound together, examine whether any piece of bone has been dislodged;
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	and remove it with suitable instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with flames according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and there remains none, then close the wound, if it is wide, and place upon it suitable poultices to promote healing, until it is cured.
de la forcele	of the foreskin
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The fracture often occurs in front of the shoulder in three ways:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	one where it is broken and dislocated in two places, with pieces, and is the easiest to heal;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	or one where there is a break with an open wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the procedure is when the fracture does not have an open wound: you need two assistants so that one can hold the shoulder where the fracture is;
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the others stretch their necks towards the wound;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	then even out the fracture with your fingers so that it is smooth and has no bumps or bumps.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you need to extend further, place a round piece of cloth or woolen cloth under the patient's shoulder, as thick as necessary;
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	and gently pull on the collarbone, while pressing the round piece of cloth with your hand to smooth out the fracture, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder out of joint because it is dislocated, then the patient should lie on his back, and place under the shoulder a small pillow, and the assistant should press the shoulder down, until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	Then gently feel the fracture with your fingers, and if you find it broken, you must split it open;
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and gently pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined due to any protrusion, then cut it off at one of the incisions you made;
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but place this instrument under the collarbone to protect the windpipe:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and resembles a spoon, and is not sharp-edged, and is as wide as it should be, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work;
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and it has two heads, as you can see, and one is wide and the other narrow, as is the opening of the wound that you made when you treated the bones;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are sure of a hot abscess, cut the wound, and if the opening is small, or if you doubt about a hot abscess, dress the wound with bandages and poultices, according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if a hot abscess comes out, moisten a bandage in rose oil and garlic and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The dislocation of the bone, when there is no wound or incision, is to put on the bone the plaster made from mill-dust and egg white, and place light bandages over it, and put a pillow under the shoulder, if necessary;
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	take a very large bandage, one palm wide, then place double draping over sponges, and anoint it;
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	take a thin board three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that the end of the bandage hangs down;
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	place the board over the break, and wrap the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy armpit, and under the sick armpit;
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and reset it from each side, and when you see that the limb holds the break correctly, and you see clearly that the board does not move over the broken bone, then release it every day, and when the ligature slackens, restrain it again;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	and make the patient lie on his back, and when he sleeps, place a small pillow under the armpit to lift the shoulder up;
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	if you ease the dislocation of the shoulder by aligning it, or tie his arm to his neck, and do not untie him if no evil accident happens until 20 days have passed;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	then begin the poultice again if you see that he still needs it, and keep doing this until he is healed;
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	and she is healed within 28 days in some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	It can happen that the shoulder dislocates or breaks suddenly without any violence, and is not known until it is touched;
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	then you should set it according to the shape of the dislocation, and reset it in every way you can according to its natural form;
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	then place powder from the mill with egg white, and light bandages, and over this a double layer of cloth;
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	then place a wide and thin pillow on top, slightly wider than the shoulder, and if there is a indentation beneath the pillow anywhere on the shoulder, fill that indentation with a wad of linen, so that the pillow lies flat.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	then tightly bind it all with a large bandage, so that the pillow doesn't move from its place, and check the binding every day.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	and whenever it softens, bind it tightly again and put the pillow back in its place if it has moved out of position, and let the patient lie on his side.
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	The shoulder is restored within 20 or 25 days.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when this number of days is complete, then loosen it, and be sure, for it isn't an easy thing for the bone to move back into place.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone protrudes forward and not underneath the heart, pierce and open the bone, and do what we have said about the fracture of the collarbone to soothe the hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The bone in the middle sometimes gets broken, but that happens rarely;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it often breaks apart during treatment.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	When it is broken in the middle, it inclines downward, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks strength, and becomes dizzy, and sometimes vomits blood, and the hair falls out from the broken bone, and he feels much better.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and he puts a pillow between his shoulders, then presses his shoulders, and brings together the sides of the two ribs with his hands, and carefully aligns them equally in all ways that he can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be;
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	then he applies poultices and compresses made of linen onto the broken bone, using a subtle amount of salt or other light material, and wraps it in a cloth, tying it onto the broken bone so that it does not move;
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	then he turns the ligament around to the back, and tightens it gently, and checks every hour how loose it is, and if it softens, then he tightens it;
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	and if it needs to be loosened due to corrosion or itching that has come to the area, or pain or an abscess, then be quick and loosen it, remove the poultice, and address what has come about in ways of treatment;
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	then reset the dislocation and hold it until it heals.
de la brisure des costes	about the breaking of ribs:
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	You should know that rib fractures only occur in the large ribs near the back, and in the front, and they only bend because they are slippery.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and the patient feels pain in the area as you press.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatment is that you reset the break as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply the ointment and bind it with a bandage, if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the rib fracture is inward-sloping, the patient feels great pain and a piercing sensation, as with pneumonia, because the bone punctures the lung.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	and it hurts when pressed, and the patient feels shortness of breath and vomits a great quantity of blood, which is a serious illness, and the ancients considered it dangerous.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that one should administer foods that swell the belly, in order to push the fracture outward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not agree that hot poultices should be applied if they have not already been used.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And some say that one should apply cupping glasses to the area to suck out the bad blood, and that makes sense.
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	However, there is a doubt that the cupping glass draws out the excess fluids due to the weakness of the body.Et si le ventouse ne peut etre, metes sor le leu un pons d’espeine, ou d’osier, qu’il fust fort et as pre
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some say that one must cover the affected area with moist woolen cloth soaked in warm oil, and place tenting between the ribs to apply pressure evenly all around, then it is treated with the treatment of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.Et autrui dit que l’on doit covrir li leu de lainne seche et de velle, et mettre oile chaut sus li leu; puis soit curez de la cure d’esguarison, et de medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot endure due to the bone pushing against the lining, and there is doubt about the patient, then one should split it open at the site of the broken rib, and one should place an instrument underneath to push out the pleural fluid.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then one should cut the bone, and gently pull it out, and then sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if a hot abscess comes, one should place wet rags soaked in rose oil on top of the site, and
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	treat the area around where the abscess should be, and let the patient lie carefully on their side where it is, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the fracture of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Sometimes a fracture occurs in the collarbone, and it pops out;
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	and also at the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take note if his hands become soft and swollen and numb, and he cannot move or straighten them, and when you prick him with a needle, he does not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is deadly in many cases, and if he becomes mute and can feel nothing when you dislocate and prick him, know that the joint of the bone is safe, and that the illness is cured if treatment is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know whether it is healthy or not, take note if the feet are swollen, and if the symptoms are in the limbs, and on the back, wind and defecation without intention;
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	and when he is lying on his stomach, there is defecation without intention.Si li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et s’il a dolour sus son ventre, et sotilité en ses piez, et sotil
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is lying on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	If the symptoms are in the limbs, and he has pain in his stomach, and weakness in his feet, and weakness
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	if he does not labor in his healing.S’il sotile en ses piez et sotilité en son ventre
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this does not happen to him, then the case is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the treatment is that you should examine whether there is a hot abscess, and then put rosemary oil or chicken egg yolk on the spine until it is soothed;
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	then place upon it one of the comforting and drying plasters, and tie it on with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest.
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	and not to sleep on the painful part until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bone protrudes, it must be covered with a bandage;
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if there is an open wound, then the two lips of the wound must be sutured together with thread, and then treated with ointment on a bandage until it heals;
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	and if the shoulder of the bone is broken, which is called the 'shoulder blade', put your left hand's thumb into your mouth, and place it equally in your other hand to your power, then apply the plaster and bandage it up, if you need to;
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then tighten it, and if there is a bone protruding, push it back in, take out the bone, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	Then it happens that the bones of the hip are broken, and if it happens, then there is a little lessening in the head.
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	and they go long, and decline to the sides, and bring pain to the patient at the site, and piercing, and swelling in what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the restoration is that you extend your hand above it, as long as you are on the break;
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and know which is the break and its shape;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	and if the break is only in the head, then put it equal to that break, so that it is in its natural shape.Et s’il brise en la costure et en la fente, si leve li chiés soulement, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil;
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long, or it declines inward, then let the patient lie on his belly, so that the restoration of that break may be prepared for him.Et se ele est dou lonc et decline au pardedens, si met ele a figure de croisse; et li restauration de cele brisure est que tu le tiens sus, et qu’ele ne se mueve pas.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have made it equal, then put on the plaster, then put on a staff or kerchief, and constrict the break so that it does not move;
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and apply the cautery under the ribs, so that the hair grows evenly.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if an abscess comes out, do not touch it until the painful abscess is relieved, and put on what we have described before;
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	then return to the restoration, and tighten it as it should be, if there is no bad event;
et c’est li maniere.	and that is the way it is done.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The shoulder joint is what is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is dislocated, it should be restored according to one of two methods:Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	one of which is to take a thin staff, smooth and of middle thickness, according to this shape:Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And take two ropes and tie them together, and hang the patient from above, and seat him on a chair;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	then let him swing his broken arm down to the floor, and have a beam of wood inserted in it, then hang him from some heavy object so that he is stretched downward;
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	then have the helpers adjust the break to be even with his hands together, so that the break is set correctly.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that one pins the patient to his hat, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands two ministers, one of whom presses what is on top of the fracture with his hands, and the other pulls from underneath to the end of the bond, and each stretches his part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you want the extraction to be more forceful, then compress beneath the fracture and above it, and extend each of the ministers to his part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, then you should place one rope in front under the armpit, and the other towards the neck, under the break;
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	and likewise if the break is towards the neck, then one rope should be placed lightly and gently, without effort, so that the break is set straight and on its proper place;Et se il ne voulent li chief de l’espaule demourer en son leu, si mets I liien legierement a lor col, et le remescheve vers la terre;
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	then make the cut even, as it should be, and hold it steady, if no abscess forms there.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if an abscess forms there, do not open it for seven days, but put soft lamb's wool soaked in arse and rose oil on it until the abscess is calm.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	Then open it, and the way to do this is to put the plaster on the cut, then raise the arm above the shoulder and put your hand on the shoulder or breast;
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	and press hard on the shoulder and arm so that the arm is straight, unless something else moves it or the bone has moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you suspect the bone has moved, use splints and put a larger and stronger splint on the cut, with one inch of space between each splint, and make each splint large enough that it goes three inches beyond the cut on both sides.Et li esteles sont si fortes que elle ne se cassent mie;
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	then stretch them over the splints, as I said at the beginning of this chapter about fracture, harder and less by moving away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the position of the splints and the stretching, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the hot abscess, then leave it bound until the seventh day, as we have said.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	Then examine the binding every three days to ensure that itching or swelling does not occur in the area, and that the wound does not become too tight as it heals.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the wound, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such accidents occur, then loosen the binding after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back with his hands on his stomach;
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	and place under the shoulder a pillow of equal wool, and check every hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken member does not move or the binding become soft;
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	if it is treated with medicine, and given the food we have previously mentioned, in such a way that the food reaches the uppermost subtleties.
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And when he begins to regain strength, then let him eat something substantial.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	It is usual for the shoulder and leg to take 40 days to heal completely;
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	and then one must loosen and administer baths and ointment treatments to ease the pain.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the dislocation is severe and stuck, it will take longer to loosen, up to two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the dislocation of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the 'ulna', one of which is small and sits below the armpit.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	The other bone is larger and sits beneath the larger bone.
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	Sometimes only the large bone is broken, sometimes only the small one, and sometimes both together.Si l’un est rompu et li autres entiers, li membres a devers la main doit estre tirrez et remuetz de son leu en tel maniere ke
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small bones are broken, their restoration and healing is easy.
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	And when the large bones are broken, their healing is poor, and more difficult than when they are broken all at once.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small bone is broken, then it should be put back into place gently and stretched slightly to align it. Se c’est li gros fosciles qui est brisié, si convient que tu le remes a son leu; et si il ne peut estre a son leu, si convient que tu le traies soulement en la guariçon, si com il est requerre.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	If it's a large bone, you must pull harder;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	and stretch him out on a pillow, and tie the hand pouch higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the other fingers, and have the patient cross his legs over himself, and the pillow in front of him higher so that the patient doesn't have to exert any effort;
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	Then extend one minister's arm under his hand, or under his armpit, and another minister above him.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then the minister should apply pressure equally, according to the best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if there are pieces in the fracture, put each one in its place, and if none of them fit that poke the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as we said before, on the chest and the bone.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if with the breaking there is a wound, I have spoken of it in a particular chapter;
si pren la cure.	then take the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if, at the beginning of the restoration, suppurating ulcers appear, then apply a dressing of ceratum made from rose oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft.
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and leave the dressing in place gently, until the suppurating ulcers are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	Then remove the ceratum, and apply an ointment made from flour with egg white, then put on the bandages, with the bandage for the fracture being a little stronger and a little larger than the others.
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and know that there must be six bandages on the arm in various positions:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two;
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and tighten more over the fracture than elsewhere, and always less as time goes on, as I said at the beginning of this chapter;
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and the bandages which are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard or rough;
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	and the thread, with which it is bound, of flax, nor too coarse nor too fine, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And then remove the bandages and examine the limb and the fracture after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if any bad accident happens to the member, such as itching coming to it, you must moisten the member with warm water until the itch is relieved;
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the member not be too tight or rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then begin the stretching again, and if the ligaments are relaxed and the bones displaced, and similarly, address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if one takes a bandage and the swelling cannot come to the member because it is too tight, then one must soften it a little and leave it for several days until the swelling goes down and then tighten it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said happen to the patient, then do not release him until 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	Or either he turns on his side, then he can put his hands to his neck, and let his necks be even, and guard against movement and rolling about, and sleep on his back;
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	and know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 35, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexes of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that in the back of the hand and on the knuckles there are few fractures, and only stretching occurs many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the palm of the hand is broken or folded, then the patient should sit cross-legged, and sit upright in front of him evenly;
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	then he should put his hand on the ground, and the minister should extend the broken bones, and make them equal so that they are well-joined;
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	and then put on the plaster and bandages, if no abscess comes, then he puts on a splint according to the quantity of the wound;et li minister li fait mettre sa main sus la toie estendue, et il tuit li met igalement. Et si li estele fu de grand leu, s’il mettret
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and the minister makes him put his hand on the ground, and they all make it equal. And if the splint is of a large wound,
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the break is at the side of the palm around the belly, then make a ball of bandages, and instruct the patient to press it against his broken palm;et li ministers mette leu la spere et li estele en son leu, et li malaide l’estrainne tant qu’il soit bien igal.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And then pull it with a long strap, and let the mark of the cautery be as big as the palm of your hand, and pull it, as it should be done.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the back of the hand, you must put a splint on top and another one underneath the palm so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the fingers.Et se li brisure est entre les dois, si covient que li malaide mette sa main croisie sus la brisure, et tu estaines lou liien entre les deux os brisiez, et lie tout entor la main; et se il y a grant flux de sang, si covient qu’il le frotte, si que li sang ne fluit.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the fracture is in one of our fingers, if it is the knuckle, set it straight, as it should be.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	And pull it with the palm, and if you see that a small, straight mark is placed to lift the fracture, and it does not move;
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	And if the fracture is in another finger, such as the index or another, set it straight and bind it to the healthy finger next to it;
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	Or you can bind them all together in a clench, or put a mark on it, as in the knuckle;
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And take care in the restoration and the preparation of a hot abscess, and treat what comes out, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of a broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The bones of the thigh are often broken, and one can see this when it turns front and back.
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	and the healing is by binding above the fracture, and the other below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the patient lies on his face, then each assistant extends their bandage to their side equally;
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and this is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is near the root of the thigh, then one ligament should go towards the buttock and the other below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And if it is near the knee, then the bandage should be above the knee, and the extension below;
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	then the surgeon sets the bone according to its natural shape with his two hands, and then applies the ointment and bandage, unless an abscess forms.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is a hot abscess, let it calm down, then return to your work and treatment;
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	the sling is made in this way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	You should wrap the break with a hard bandage folded in two or three layers to stop the bleeding. Then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the toe, and tie a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, so that the end of the thread comes above.
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	Then turn the bandage around the leg and thigh, and place splints on the break, and put a splint on the shinbone of the leg.
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	Then use eight pieces of soft cloth between the leg and thigh to make it even, and then start binding firmly in three or four turns around the break.
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	And as you go higher up from the break, loosen the binding.
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	Then cut two of the threads that you tied between the leg and thigh, and untie three splints that are above, then go back down to the end of the thread, so that you come under the foot.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	and hold it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, until no abscess, swelling or similar occurs.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if something happens to it, then loosen it, and address what is happening to it, as we have said many times:
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	and if there are pieces of bone piercing through, then they must be removed, if possible.
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	And if it cannot be removed, then the area should be split and the bone pulled out.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And sometimes the thighbone breaks in this way when they put on armor, just like in the shoulder and arm:
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	However, with this restoration, the malady is not relieved.Et si il ne se guérit, puis est grant douleur en li cuisse et en l’ajutoire, si
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And you should know that the hip is restored in one day, or a little less or more, according to the different constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the joint of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the knee joint there is little breaking, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is only a split, or a perforation, and it happens with any wound, and without a wound, and this feels good to everyone.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is to put straight what is bent in his fingers, so that when they are set straight he can move them.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	then apply the plaster, and put a round bandage on it if necessary, and bind it as it should be, then follow all the instructions we have given for other fractures, such as hot abscess and similar conditions;
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	applying to each injury what is suitable for it, until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is properly called the 'tibia', and the other is called the 'fibula'.
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And it has all the same injuries as the arm, and its restoration is the same as that of the arm, and its treatment is also the same. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg becomes useless in every way.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if only the smaller bones are broken, then it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it is seen clearly;
et torne desoz.	and turns underneath.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Therefore, apply extension, and make it equal, and tie the bandages equally;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	but if the break is ugly, and there are several pieces, then the extension should be less and gentler;
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and adjust it according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have finished your work, take two bundles of wooden splints that reach from one side of the leg to the other, and let them be as long as the leg from just below the knee to beneath the foot;
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	then wrap two bands around them above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, and at this time, the leg will not be able to decline to the right or left, and thus it is good;
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	and some administer the fire cautery on the long bone of the leg, and it is from the wood, and they put the leg forward to prevent movement, and properly they do this in the break where there is injury;
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	and move the leg each day, to see if there is any hot abscess or other accident;
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the break in the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no break, but sometimes there is a break in the bones of the foot and also two wounds, and it happens with various injuries.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if there is a broken bone in the foot, and you see the bones protruding on top of each other, then put the patient's foot down on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, and then put your own foot on his, where the bones are raised, and then press it until they return to their place;
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	Then put on the ointment and bandages, and under the sole of the foot place a small wooden board with two flat sides, then tighten it to the foot comfortably, then wrap cloth around it, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And after three or four days have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones healed, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if any of the fingers are broken, restore them, as we have said for the fingers of the hand;
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	then put a splint on the broken finger according to its length, and let it be a little wider, then place under the foot that table which I have described, and adjust it properly.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	and if there are two or three, or more, broken, then put on each finger a splint according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and adjust the table under the foot.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	and let there be a stop under the head of the table pressing against the belly of the foot, so that it may hold well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And you must not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, for which we have already spoken:
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	and treat each accident as it should be treated.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone in the wrist
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bones of nature are broken, let her sit upright, then lean towards the back, and be held from behind.
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	Then fill the hollow with cotton wool, and put in as much as it can hold.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	Then raise the woman, and gently press her back little by little, and thus the cotton will go into the hollow, and the bones with it.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	And when she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished, put it back again. Do this for seven days.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	The fracture will then be healed, and if you wish, take a bladder of a ram, tie it at the neck with a string, and fill the bladder with the hollow.
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	Then blow into the string until the bladder is inflated inside.
la nature si revenra li brisure;	nature will heal the fracture
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then it should be filled with cotton, and left like that for several days, until it heals.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bone of the man's or woman's shoulder is broken, we restore it in the same way as we have said about the hip bone;
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	and these breaks are not hidden from those who dedicate themselves to studying and understanding my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the break reveals in many ways the correct path to restoration:
enten le donques.	listen therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	When a rod is broken, take a goose's throat and insert the rod into it;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	then wrap cloth around it, leave it for three days or tie it tightly, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	from breaking with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as in the thigh or shoulder bone or similar, to be treated immediately, as the remedies we have described attest.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, and there is no infection from vitriol, if you have nothing else, then restart by resetting the dislocation in that same hour, or that day, if no abscesses arise.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if a hot abscess comes, let recovery wait until the next day, so that the abscess may be quieted; and don't touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would bring about an evil accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is appearing on the uncovered chest, one should gently put it back into place with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extension is not available to make your hands even, then use this instrument which is made of iron, seven or eight inches long, and its width according to the size of the wound;
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and therefore it is necessary for the surgeon to have three or four, depending on what he needs for each fracture treatment.
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and it should be round and slightly large so that it does not bend when compressed on the limb while you work, and it should be pointed at the front, and thick in the middle towards the front, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And it is called a "spit", so that the curved head should be placed on the prominent part of the bone;
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	and the handle at another time, as much as it will go, and it should be even with each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the dislocation is subtle, and the instrument cannot hold the bone well, then you must chip the head of the bone, so that the instrument can hold it.Et si li brisure est griez, et le chef de l’os est trove par la pelezure del chiés, si covient que tu ramones la dislocation premierement; car il n’est pas bon qu’il soit contusioné en pluxors lieux.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then use an appropriate tool, such as an incision knife or needle, at your discretion;
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	then cut away what is left in the bone of asperities and fine splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	Do this until it is in its place, then moisten the cloth with black sticky wine, and properly if it is in a wound.
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not put cerotic ointment or anything else on the wound that would cause pus and corruption;
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	then dress the wound once you have set the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and bandage it all around according to the size of the wound, and take care that the wound is not constricted by the bandage;
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	and many times this has been done to fools, causing pain, or sometimes death or corrosion;
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	and it is the most gentle and effective treatment for dislocation.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is large or deep, and you doubt that a bad accident will occur as we have said, and you feel pain in the area, then you should not put anything on it;
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	but wrap around, instead of pillows, hard, folded cloths, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that pus is coming from the wound, then remove what you have put on it and put on an ointment that heals wounds, such as tetrafarmaçon and similar ointments.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And when the bone is back in its natural place, it should be made comfortable and not restricted; and if there are great pains, anoint with healing oil or ointment by rubbing, such as oil of larkspur, or of laurier, or of garlic, or of onions, or of other healing oils.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary for the limb to be prepared in such a way that the bowstring runs downstream easily.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they persist for many days and the bow cannot be set but keeps slipping back, know that there are tiny pieces of bone causing this, so you must probe the wound with a probe, and remove all these broken pieces that cause the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula or other form of corruption occurs, you should treat it according to what he said in the chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, as in the thigh or shoulder bone, and similar large bones, do not draw it out, but leave it be until it can be pulled out;
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	by chance it will fall out after 20 or 30 days, then clean the wound if you can;
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	and if you cannot, then leave it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of bruises that come over the soudure
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	Many times after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, it is an ugly sight to see the shape of the limb;
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	and by chance the limb cannot do its natural works.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	So be wary then if the nerve is affected:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	if the patient takes constipating medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcocolla, aconite, and similar others, either by themselves or all together, and concocts them with dry wine, egg white, or garlic;
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and places them on the head as poultices, pressing firmly, and not loosening for several days.
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	and then he loosens it, and begins another one, until the swelling is gone;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	or you press on a well-made plaster;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	for the property of the plaster is that it removes all swellings from the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the swelling has turned into a hardness like stone, and it needs to be removed, cut away the top, and reveal the excess;
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	or you have it removed by a shaver, until it is gone, and then dress the wound until it heals.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb which is weakened after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the broken bone is restored, and remains weak and slender after the limb, this happens for many reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	one of which is that it was bound too tightly, and not as it should have been;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or because there are too many ligaments, and the nourishment cannot reach the member;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	or for excess of moisture;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or for too great movement, not in its hour;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	or because there is little blood in his body, and he is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the treatment is that you feed the patient and make the body tender, so that the blood increases within him;
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and give him baths, and give him joy and leisure;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	then apply pitch to the limb so that it attracts great nourishment, and often bathe it in warm water, until the nourishment reaches the limb;Et li cure si est qu’il soit mene a la chause, et al buef, et a la vine, et a la lieure, et a la seliere, et au vin clers, et a l’ole, et a la migaie, et aux fraies, et au pain d’
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the treatment is that he be led to walk, and ride a horse, and go hunting, and play sports,
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	until the limb is straightened after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bones are visible, and the form of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function.
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	don't believe the fools who say that one must break the limb again from scratch, and many foolish people have done this in our land;
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and these practices are blamed, and they cause great harm and sometimes death;
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	nevertheless, if the dislocations and the tortures are recent, then they should be soaked in hot water or herbs that soften, such as leaves of marsh-mallow, roots, and sweet rocket, and similar things;
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	and make a soothing ointment from diaquilon, and take the mucilage of marsh-mallow, and cook it with tallow or sesame oil, and apply it to the affected area;
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	or you take fat figs and grind them with horse manure, and similar medicines that soften quickly.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the dislocation is caused by continuous and prolonged rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And bring about movement in the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the twist is awake and hardened like stone, and it needs to be removed with iron, then it must be cut close to the bone, with a thin, delicate incision.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and put poultice and bandage in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs in someone, one must immediately bring it back into alignment without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if it is delayed, the place will swell, and perhaps it will be reset in the wrong position;
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	Therefore, one should not move it when it is swollen:
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	many times it brings spasms and other pains;li corps ne puet demorer en leus, ains doit il se mouevoir.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	Nevertheless, when this happens, the patient should be bled, then left alone until the abscesses are soothed;et li dolors et les spames, et li moevemens, si conviennent qu’il demoure en leus.
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	then warm the limb with hot water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each limb as the healing comes into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocation from the head to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	It happens that jaws are dislocated downward, and dislocations of both are according to two manners:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	either they are slightly displaced from their places, and softened a little;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	or they are completely displaced and hang down; saliva flows from his mouth which he cannot hold, nor can he close his mouth or wrap his tongue around words.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself in several ways.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and accomplished, then you must reset it quickly and not delay at all;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	and in such a way that the minister grabs the head of the patient, and pushes his fingers of one hand into the root of the jaw's joint inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides;
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other two fingers of the hand should be pressed down to straighten them;
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and instruct the patient to soften his jaw, and move it all around.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the priest looks at her equally, until she returns to her place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if they are stuck together, especially if it is the two mandibles, pour hot water and oil over them, moving them gently;
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	do not force them, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are returned to their proper position and the mouth of the patient is closed properly without softening, then place wet cloths on it made from rose oil and wax, then tie it lightly with soft bindings;
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the patient sleep on his back, and let his head be between two pillows so that he does not move it to the right or left, nor try to speak, but take light food, until the pain is gone, and the jaw joint is healed;
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then eat and drink what he wants easily, without opening his mouth to chew or drink, until the jaw is well healed and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be reset within an hour and are not converted to their places, then fevers and usual sores come, and perhaps stomach issues, and perhaps vomiting pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, then you will know it is destruction:
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and many times the person dies within seven days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forepaw cannot be dislocated from within the continued part of it and from the foot, and is dislocated sometimes by force, and it is felt well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	The cure is for the patient to lie flat on his back and extend his arms:
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then press firmly on the spot with your palm, and it will return to its place;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then apply the ointment and bandage it tightly;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the shoulder that is towards the neck cannot be dislocated;
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	if not, and if it dislocates even once, then reset it to its place, as we have said;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	then apply the ointment and bandage it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed;
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and thus is the head of the shoulder brought back when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	You should know that there are three ways in which the shoulder can be dislocated:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	One way is for it to dislocate at the bottom part of the shoulder;
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	And the second way is at the top of the foot;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	And by chance it dislocates from above, and that rarely happens;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	It does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inside for the nerves;
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	And often it dislocates underneath towards the shoulder, especially in those who are very thin, because in them it comes out easily;
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	In those who are fat, it only comes out and goes back in with force.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men that they receive a blow or bruise, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	Therefore you must test it to make sure;de coi si ele desalue par la partie dou pis, et ne se remue point, sache bien qu’ele est desaluee a li asselle, et sache qu’
et adonques encomence la cure.	and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And you will know of a dislocation when it is lower towards the armpit, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a manifest difference;
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	and you will find a pit at the top of the shoulder, and under the armpit the top of the shoulder as though it were an egg;
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move in any way;
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you will find it clearly at the top;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this type of dislocation is not difficult to fix when it is new, or if the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the method is for the assistant to lift the hand of the sick person up, then put your knees under the armpit and lift the joint with force upwards into place;
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	and the minister lifts the hand, then extends it upward, before placing it back down.
si venra hastanment.	then come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water;
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and the minister should apply softening and soothing poultices, such as infusions of alder, fenugreek, and cornflower in water, and it should be applied;
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then the patient should be laid on his back, and a woolen cloth of equal thickness, neither too soft nor too hard, should be placed underneath him. Then the minister should place his heel on the sto, and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and draw the hand of the patient;
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and another minister should hold the head of the patient, so that it does not move downward;
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	that shoulder returns right away, and if you set it again according to this method:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and you should have a person present who is larger than the patient;
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and should stand straight toward the shoulder, and push his shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit upward, so that the patient hangs in the air;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	and another assistant pulls the hand of the patient downward toward the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the disease is too slight, one can place something heavy on it, and the dislocation will return immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And it is reset in another way:Tu prends la main dou malaides, et mets li doigt sus li col, et
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	and you put your finger on his neck, and you push the long brand into the ground so that the shoulder is as high as the wrist, neither too thick nor too thin;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	then it is placed under the patient, but he should have a soft cloth over him, and the patient should be still from the waist up;
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then let his hand be stretched out downwards on the other side, and the joint will return to its place gently;
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	and if it does not want to return despite all that we have said, then perform this cure:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	take a stick two arms long and four digits wide, with the tip bent backwards to fit into the joint beneath the dislocation, as follows:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	then tie it with a cloth under the joint of the patient so that the stick does not hurt him, then put it underneath the dislocation:
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	and stretch out his arm over the long stick and tie the shoulder to the stick, and the arm to the tip of the hand, then put his arm on the edge of a board that is wider than it is long, and stretch out his hand downwards, and let the body hang down on the other side:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	the joint returns now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is back in place, however it is, you should put a sphere of wool under the shoulder blade, then apply the prepared ointment made from mill dust, with incense and egg white, over the entire shoulder and around it; then stretch it underneath the shoulder blade gently, and tie the string over the ointment, and embrace the hand to his chest, and let the arm remain like this.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And one must eat little, as long as the member is comfortable, for it will heal faster.
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then eat more after a few days or seven, and move it;
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	and if it is stiff and not soft, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has left its place due to moisture or for any other reason, you should administer cauteries to it at three openings, as described in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all this and it comes undone after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot lift his arm upstream, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched out or softened;
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation which is towards the foot, and of the breast, or behind, is made by thrusting, and stretching with the hands, and one administers to another;
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing there is pain in the limb, and with movement it becomes worse over time, then the patient should use the bath many times until the pain goes away and returns to its original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	Know that the joint of the neck is dislocated at times, and returns to place.
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	and is dislocated in all parts, especially in front and behind; the dislocation is not reset, for it can be seen and felt.
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	and it dislocates according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick neck with the healthy one, you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	Because the joint is damaged and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And you must reset it as you would an abscess, for if a deep abscess comes, it would be painful to reset.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	and at times it cannot be fully reset, especially when it is in the back;
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	it is worse than other dislocations and causes greater pain, and sometimes death ensues.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And when it can be reset, you must extend your arm with both hands;
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	and his arms should be spread out, and the hands turned according to the neck, all around, and the joint pressed at its joints together, or at the root of the palm, until it returns to place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, then it returns when he bends his hand to his hand, and raises from the root of the palm the wrist which was dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not want to go back into place, then apply strong extension.
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and one minister extends the arm, and the other tilts it, so that it does not move with the extension;
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	then turn the arm to each side after you have wrapped a long, wide cloth around it;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when you see the joint of the hand, anoint it with oil to soften the joint, then push the joint firmly back into place;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is back in place, apply a dry plaster with egg white, and hold it firmly, and wind the arm around the neck of the patient, and leave it for several days, then remove the plaster.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is firm in its place, then loosen the binding, and leave it;
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	and if you see that the joint is not set well, then start over with the plaster and binding, and leave it for several days until it is firmly in place;
puis le deslie.	then loosen it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if he feels pain after the joint is moved back into place, and it still moves, then bathe and rub it gently, and press until the pain subsides.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	Or you may place a fat sheep's testicle on the joint, then leave it for a day and night, then remove it, and have him enter the bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	And when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the testicle back on, and then back into the bath. And so do this repeatedly until the pain is gone.
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And do this two or three times, until he is healed.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	And if you see that it is moist, put warm cow manure on it with butter and press it onto the joint;
si revenra a sa disposition.	and it will return to its natural state.
li dislocation de la main	dislocations of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	A dislocated hand is healing, and the recovery is quicker than for other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	Nevertheless, it is necessary to return it to its place gradually, at the same time that it was dislocated, so that the joint swells or a hot abscess forms there.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the method of reduction is to place the patient's hand on a table, and extend the minister's hand, and look at it placed evenly so that he places his palm over the appearance of the joint, and push it until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	Nevertheless, you should check that it is in the right place;
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	then put the patient's back of his hand on a table, extended and reduced.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	If the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then put the patient's hand on a table with his palm facing upwards, and let the assistant put his hand on the affected joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, that is good.S’ele ne veut revenir, mettes li la main sus une tauble,
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then strain with soothing plasters hot abscesses, and leave it thus without re-encasing.Et s’il li traist au leu, si li mettiez une fons de vinas a la jointure et al oile de panon, et al oile d’olifre, ou
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after a few days, then the joint will remain crooked.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and does no harm to the patient as long as the hand is soft and can grasp nothing at all:
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	then you know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries;
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	if there is nothing else to do except to cauterize the area, and perhaps nothing else will help.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, then apply the plaster that we have mentioned, then constrict it and leave it for 5 days, then loosen it and let it be thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is any swelling, then moisten it with warm water, and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on both sides, sometimes at the back of the palm or on the inside;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	then reset the fingers, and pull them back into place until they are aligned, then hold the top of the finger, and turn it towards the affected part;
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and let it be for two days, and then put it back in place that same day;
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	and do not eat at night as we have said, but during the day, make him move and then put him to bed.
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this often, until he is healed, and also do the same if he is dislocated in his hand or arm, and act just as before, until he is healed.
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do the same for any other dislocation.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	from the dislocation of the head and back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the head or neck is dislocated, there is no cure, for death comes quickly with this ailment.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the signs are that the bowels move without willing it, and he cannot hold it back, and often a member becomes paralyzed, either both legs or both arms or one.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And often the skin becomes black in four places:
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	the one that turns black on the back is called "gilbositez":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	the treatment for this is to reward if the blackness comes from childhood.
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	if there is no cure or healing, no matter what.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falling or from blows or similar things, the ancients spoke of many ways to cure with great words, but in all cases there was not much benefit;
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that the hunchback that comes before the foot, neither medicine nor health heals;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also that which comes directly on both sides, and cannot be healed except by that which comes properly in the back, as I said;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the disease be stretched out on his face in one place equally, and have a strap under him, so that he does not bend;
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then insert the brand into the head on the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a string under the armpits of the disease, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	and two servants know the bonds, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the twelve torches;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and let them be well bound, the torches as we have said, and let the nurse put her palms on the spine, until it straightens out.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not straighten out with this treatment, take a board three yards long, and lay it under the back, and let the patient lie on his side, and put the middle of the board under the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and let the nurse put her feet on the other end of the board, and press firmly, until it straightens out;
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and if you see it, turn the wheel that turns to the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is that you fix two torches at the head of the patient's arm, and two others towards the feet, and have between each torch, above and below, a palm of space;
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	and have a hole in each stake where the cord runs through, and let the stakes be firmly driven into the ground so that they do not move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and between each pair of stakes have a turning stake, around which the cords turn, and at each turning place have two small stakes about a palm long for the cord to turn around.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	Then tie the cord that is between the stakes at the head to the turning stake towards the head, and the other cord towards the feet to the other turning stake, and each of the ministers turns their turning stake along all the cord, and the master puts the spine level as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is level, then put on a drying plaster with an abundance of egg white, and then the bandages, and then the pillow of a tablet three digits long, so that it covers the hunchback area and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a cord as we have said, and use the patient's subtle numbing medicine until they are healed.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	and if nothing comes of it for the health, then one must administer softening and soothing medicines, with the star that we mentioned earlier;
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	and sometimes they administer a poultice, and sometimes the appearance comes in the lower spine of the back, and one thinks it is dislocation;
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	and it is the bone that is exposed, therefore one must not be too presumptuous about it:
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	for fear of causing death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	You should know that in the joints of the hip and the shoulder, there are no dislocations, only in the other joints; and there is no dislocation like those others;
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	and the joint of the hip is dislocated into four parts:d’une part li os qui est a la cote, et li os qui est a la cuisse, et li os qui est a
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	one part is the bone that is at the ribcage, and the bone that is at the thigh, and the bone that is inside
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	and more inside, and little dislocated before and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the affected leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the affected knee appears more open than the healthy one, and the affected person cannot bend their knee to the fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and the area near it is swollen with a hot abscess due to the shoulder joint coming closer.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes from without, is that this accident is contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs of someone who has this in front are that their leg is well aligned according to its structure.
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	However, they cannot bend their knee without pain, and if they want to walk, they cannot do so, and they retain their urine, and the ankle swells, and when they go to the toilet, they pass it over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him to whom it happens behind, are that he cannot bend or double his knee, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the veins are softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The cause of this type of dislocation is that you first check if the dislocation is old and it remains in its position, then there will be no improvement.
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	and he must not become presumptuous.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And for those with a fresh dislocation, which comes in three ways, you must hurry to return the joint to its place, and stretch it in and out, and move it to the right and left.
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	Perhaps it will return on its own and not need further treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this way, you must strongly pull the limb, and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or with one hand tied to the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	and another person stretches their hand over it in such a way that they push their hands under their armpits, then tightens a cord around the thigh;
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another ties the head;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they all pull up and down at the same time, until the patient is lifted off the ground once, and then hold him suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This stretching method is common for four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If not, then treatment must be applied to its appearance.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is in the armpit, you must lead the patient to lie on his healthy side, then place the ligature at the root of the thigh, and at the spot below the armpit, then let the ligature ascend towards the armpit and the axilla;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	then have another assistant grip his arms and squeeze and extend the affected thigh in a correct manner:
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	and if it does not return to its place immediately;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this type of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot bring it back in the manner we have described, then you must tie together both feet of the patient with a strong, soft ligature around the heels and knees, and have the affected leg extended two fingers more than the other;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	then let him be hung from the top of a pole, and let him be two arms' length above the ground;
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	then instruct the assistant to hold the top of the thigh tightly, and another assistant hanging with the patient should hold the thigh firmly, for the joint will return quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is healed, then let the patient lie down, as we have said in the case of gout, and tightly bind the leg and foot that has been affected;
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	then put two torches on, one at the head and one at the foot, then place the torch between the legs of the patient in the dislocation;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and have wet cloths laid all around so that the patient does not blush, then each assistant stretches him towards themself, and the examiner puts pressure with his hand on the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	Otherwise, place him on a table and press it as we have said in the case of dislocation, and lay the patient on his healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when a dislocation is in front, then the leg of the patient must be extended gently, and according to what I have said;
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	and places his weight upon the affected angle, then presses with the other hand, and stretches it downward towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is to the rear, then the patient should not be stretched out downward, nor lifted up off the ground, but he must be as though his hip were dislocated to the rear, just as we have said about lying on one's side with both hips;
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and it is on his face, and the bandage stretched as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	and it will be in place when the patient stretches his legs, and they will be even;
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	then adjust the thighs, and apply the ointment, and restrain it with a bandage so that the hip does not move;
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	and rest for 3 or 4 days, then loosen it, and apply the ointment on top of it;
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	and if you see that they are even, then restrain them as before, and leave it for 3 days;
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	then loosen it, and make him walk comfortably until the limb is healed.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The knee is dislocated in 3 ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	that is, inside and outside, and behind;
et ne desalue point devant.	and do not give up.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the sign is that you command the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not straighten at the thigh, know that he is dislocated;
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back against his face, and put his foot on your feet;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	then take his knee in your palms, and pull between your fingers, then bend both sides of the knee jointly;
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	and another minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he straightens his leg at the thigh easily;
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and put on the plaster, and straighten the leg at the thigh, and bind them together strongly for 3 or 4 days, then loosen it;
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and do not move the patient until the limb is conforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the member is not at all, then administer strong stretching, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes dislocated, and sometimes fully relaxed, both inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and lean forward towards the part where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	the movements should be light, and one should gently extend the hand when it is only numbed.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated all the way through, you should make the patient sit upright, and hold the limb firmly by the leg, above the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with the left twice, then extend it upwards, and flex it gently upwards;
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	and do this twice, as we have said, by bending and pulling the foot;
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	if it returns to place, that is good;
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	if not, then perform the action again, for it will return;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot be reset in that way, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground and push the staff firmly into the ground between his buttocks, and tie a cloth around him so that he does not bend forward.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then the assistant pulls on the thigh, while another assistant stretches out the foot with his hands or with a rope tied around the ankle, holding it against the collar of the leg.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then each assistant pulls equally, and the staff is placed between the buttocks of the patient to restrain him when they stretch.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then the assistants put their weight into their hands, and another assistant pulls on the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will return with force.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is back in place, then apply the plaster and bandages on top, and pull it firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, and be careful of the nerves that are on the ankle behind, so that the ligature is not too tight.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	then let it stay for two or three days, and if the ligatures loosen, then tighten them again;
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	then untie it on the third or fourth day, and the patient can go about their business after four days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if he goes before that time, it is not safe for him to do so, as he may relapse.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if painful abscesses arise, then you must soothe them as we have said elsewhere, until they heal.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the arms are dislocated, one should stretch them gently without force, and this is a minor issue.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any part of the back or foot, you should have the patient sit upright on a flat surface or table, then put your foot over the affected area and press down firmly until it pops back into place;
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	and when it is back in place and there is nothing protruding, put a two-footed board under the sole of the foot, then tighten it firmly, and leave it for three days, then untie it;
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let him rest until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, many times the patient dies.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you are wise in the art and have used it for a long time, and if you are pitying and merciful and slow to anger; then do not be bold.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and in the beginning, use things that soothe an abscess, and leave the patient in God's hand if you do not see hope of health;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, then immediately reset the member to its place so that the hot abscesses heal.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the member is in its place, then minister soothing things for hot abscesses and treat the wound as it should be with drying ointments.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if there is a fracture along with the dislocation and broken small bones, then set the bones, and do what we have said in simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	and beware of going astray out of fear, according to what I have said, for it is better for you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your weapons and your body.
