O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, very dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine together with its fulfillment, and I have made an end through its explanations and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And in a vision it came to me that I would complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hands, namely 'surgery'.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of the hands is neglected in our region and is unfamiliar to all, it has been lost, and nothing remains of the ancient knowledge except for small descriptions in books that have been handled by hand.Et quanque li fuers ne puet estre prescheve par les livres ne par les uers, et n’est riens quere demore, si convient que le corps soit traittre en la cirurgie, et li fuers estorbes par les mains, s’il poait estre.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity, closed intentions, and alienated knowledge.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	Now it seems to me that I want to enliven it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation;
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	and I will come together with the forms of the instruments of cautery, and other tools of the work with the adjustment of their declaration and preparation as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And one who undertakes this must surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as far as he knows the judgment of members, and forms and conjunctions and separations of veins, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews and the number of teeth, and the movement and of their veins both moving and resting, and from where they originate.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And for this reason Hypocras says that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little;
et meismement en l’art de main.	and especially in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We tell you at the beginning of this book that anyone who is not familiar with the things mentioned above, be careful that he does not make a mistake and harm people;
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	so that I have many times encountered several of those who intervene in this science and abandon it without knowledge or experience.Et qui conisse la science, il doit la garder et la conserver;
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I saw a foolish man who cupped an abscess of scrofula on a woman's neck, and cupped the arteries in her neck;
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	so much blood issued forth that the woman died between his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I saw another man who treated a stone in a man's groin; the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	he carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I saw another who lanced a vein in the breast of a woman and gave her all the blood that was in the vein, so that the woman died then. And I had already been called to treat her, and I saw the nature of the disease and the size of the stone, and if they cut it out she would have died then.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And I saw another fool who treated the Duke of our land, who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound;
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the foolish doctor bound the break above the wound with strong ligatures, and did not leave any wadding at the wound, and left it like that;
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	and he commanded that he must not remove it;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and it remained thus, the leg swollen and the foot, until it came to ruin.And I saw another fool who treated an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cupped the arteries in her neck;
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and loosen his leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I had loosened it, he was at ease and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	However, the corruption in the limb was already confirmed, and I could not heal it;
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	and the corruption did not cease from going through the limb until the member was completely destroyed.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another doctor who lanced an abscess that had become infected due to the negligence of his lord.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	Because a ulcer, when it is pure of melancholy humor, one should not touch it with iron unless it is in such a place that one can completely remove all that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And so, dear son, you should know that the work of medicine is divided into two parts:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	that is, there is danger in many conditions;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show in each chapter of this book where there is doubt and fear.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	And so it is necessary that you be careful, so that foolish people do not speak badly about you.Car maintes fois il arrive que leu li corps est en tel cas qui n’est pas a leur pouvoir de le guérir, si que il
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	If you take up your arms in battle, and embark on your campaigns lightly and resolutely, and follow the best course so that by the grace of God you attain victory and are praised;
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and leave behind the terrible diseases of the body;
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	and lay aside your arms so that you may be delivered from what makes you hesitate, and have faith in yourselves so that you may pass from this world to the next with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galen says in one of his warnings:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not neglect a serious illness, lest you be called a foolish doctor."Si l’om medecine ne peut la guérir, querrez la divine provence qui nule chose ne laisse de ce
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have arranged this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medical cauteries, and it is an ordered chapter from the head to the feet.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	It includes the forms of instruments, and the application of cauteries, and all that is necessary for the procedure.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping, and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things.
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	And this chapter includes instructions and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is about resetting dislocations and twists, and similar things.
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	And it includes instructions for the head down to the feet, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus, as we remember the work, it is fitting that I describe the nature of aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the quality of aid, and the cause of harm, are the most lengthy subjects and subtle sciences, and the secret remedies;
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	And about this, many wise men have spoken and agreed upon it;
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	And I am content with their words, for I desire brevity.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that cautery aids universally in all conditions, provided there is matter present, except in two conditions;
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	that is to say, hot condition without matter, and dry condition without matter.Car si li cauteres trove la matere, li cauteres li destroeit li matere et li mal, por ce ke
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In a complex hot and dry nature together with matter, some people have devised and said that cautery is of great help.
et li autre dirent le contraire:	and others say the contrary:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	that cautery does not benefit illness that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	Because the nature of fire is hot, it should not be treated with heat or dryness in a hot disease; and in a cold and moist nature, cautery is an aid.
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	and those who say the contrary argue that cautery helps greatly with hot and dry diseases that originate in the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	Because when you compare the human body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this opinion.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found this to be true through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And nevertheless, one should not undertake it if he has not experienced it, and who knows through long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of men's complexions, and their dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and their outcomes and the season.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	We have no fear of other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the physicians agreed and concurred about the use of cauteries.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my son, that a cautery combines fire with the secrets of healing, and is of greater benefit than a burning cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	Because fire is simple, and does not harm except the member which is burned, and does no harm to any other part if properly applied.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	Burning medicines pass from one limb to another by moving away, and bring great sickness to the limbs through poor healing.
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	and sometimes they kill the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not do this if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And I have discovered this through experimentation and through the length of service and study that I have devoted to the craft; and I have considered the truth of things;
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	and because of this I will excuse myself from the length of my speech, for I do not wish to take away the secret that is reserved for fire, and the quality of its work, describing how it cures the illnesses of the body, as the philosopher explains in his demonstration.
or le recevez en vos pensees.	Now receive this into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on which days cauteries should be performed, and chose a suitable time.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that cautery is suitable at all times because the harmful humors are drawn out by the help of cautery;
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	and likewise if the cautery is for painful and urgent conditions that cannot wait until a more serious evil afflicts the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And never think, dear son, as fools do;
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	for the disease that is healed by cautery does not return;
et il le dient ensi;	and thus they hold it:
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not as they believe, for cauteries are not what they think, since cautery is a medicine that moves the complexions, dries up the humors that cause pain, and is superior to other medicines due to its swiftness, its virtue, and its lordly power.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And it is possible that the disease may sometimes come according to the complexions of the patient, the site of the disease, and its power;
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	and the excesses are gathered in him through the digestion of foods and similar things, unless cautery is administered to dry up the excess moisture in the place where there is little superfluity and moisture, as with tooth cauteries for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return;
mais ce avient poc.	but this rarely happens.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and that is because:
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	they believe that cauterization should only be used after other medical treatments have failed, but their understanding is flawed. Cauterization is the last resort of medicine because when we have tried various treatment methods for a disease and they don't work, then we turn to cauterization, and it does work.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is clear that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancient scholars said that cauterization with a gold instrument is gentler than with iron, and they said so because of the quality of gold and the highness of its substance.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	They also said that the heat of the cautery does not cause blisters, but this is not true, as I have experimented and found it to be true in some people:
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	and cauterization with gold is better than with iron, just as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And yet when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down immediately;
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if it is heated too much;
si font au feu;	if they are made in the fire;
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	and so there is enough difficulty.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this we use fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have arranged this chapter from the head to the feet so that the way is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is useful for moisture and coldness on the head, and there are two reasons for it being used in a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for many diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged with a cleansing, purgative medicine for 3 or 4 days, depending on what the strength, age, and condition of the patient can bear;
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	and then make the head of the cautery.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then have him sit cross-legged between your hands and place his hands on top of his knees;
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	afterwards, place the palm of your hand between his two eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	and let it come to your two middle fingers, and then bleed from there and heat the cautery which is called "olive", of which this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And place it over the spot marked with ink, and while lowering and drawing your hand back and forth, gently twist it;
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	then slowly raise your hand, and return to the spot if you see a little hole in the bone;
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	and if you don't see it, repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you;
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	afterwards, take a bit of salt and place it in soft cotton, put it over the spot, and leave it for three days;
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	afterwards, put dampened cotton on top;
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and let it stay until the blister is gone;
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	afterwards, treat the wound with the ointment called 'tetrafarmaçon' until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And the elders say that the more a wound stays open, the more it drains;
et por ce si aide mues.	and for this reason, movement helps.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some say that one must leave the cautery in place until part of the bone is burnt, and then have the burnt portion of bone removed and the wound healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And the others say that one must let the cautery burn so high, and press so hard that they lower the bone as widely as a woman's thimble, so that the humors can flow out.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and one must leave the wound open for a long time;
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	afterwards, one must clean and sutured it.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem good to me in any way, except in some people where there is fear;
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and I think that I should let it be;
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	because the head is weakened by continued dissolutions of nature, as we testify in other members;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and likewise, when the shoulder of the sick person is weakened by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is milder for me, and with this I work together for salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of headache
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When chronic headache comes and lasts a long time, the patient should use herbs and pills called "cochie", and purgatives for the head, and oils and plasters.
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	And if they perform the cautery we mentioned before and it doesn't work,
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take care that the head of the patient is not of a cold nature, and is not too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	then cauterize him under that cautery a little bit as we said above. Et s’il ne wert pas amendoin, et se li cauteres par les oiles qui qu’il ait, et
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	And if it is not better and the cauteries with the oils he has do not help, then cauterize each horn of the head to the bone, as we said before, and cauterize in the place called "vessel". et s’il ne wert pas amendoin, si fai li cautere sus l’esgouttoir dou chief, qui est apelez «vasselz», si com nous avons dit desus.
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and are used to treat wounds.
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and lighten your hand so that you do not touch the bone:
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	the patient feels much more pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere;
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	and the cauteries for horns should be more delicate than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and this is how it is done:
dou cautere dou chief	of the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When sudden pain arises in the head and the disease extends to the eye, and the shoulder is purged with cleansing medicines, and all other remedies I have described in the section on diseases have been tried without success:
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	then you must perform cauterization in two ways, that is, with hot iron and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	For the cauterization with hot iron, take a small piece of alder wood, remove the bark and apply it to the shoulder in such a way that you can place the wood under the skin;
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	and when it is bound, tie it well and leave it thus for twelve hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	then untie it and apply a poultice of garlic, leaving the wound like that for two or three days;
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	then put on linen soaked in butter until pus comes out.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the wound has healed, treat it with ointment until it is completely healed;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	and if you see any of the burning medicines I have written about in the twelfth treatment of burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is done in this way.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery until it is hot enough to use.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called 'close' because the head is formed in the shape of a lid or has a small protuberance, and in the middle there is a small appearance;
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and place it on the painful area, and hold your hand and gently turn the fire a little bit so that half of the thickness of the skin is burned;
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	and hold your hand over the artery until it stops pulsating and flows with an abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	After this, put cotton in the wound and apply a poultice for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	then wet cotton with butter, and then dress the wound with ointment until it heals;
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	and if you wish to cauterize this wound with the instrument called a 'knife', do so at the very tip, and be careful not to touch the artery in this wound which is not old.
de emigraine	of a hemorrhoid
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you are dressing a wound as we have described above in the sections on diseases, and it is not helped, and you see that neither of the cauteries mentioned earlier with medicine or with fire help, then you must heat the instrument called a  'knife' until it turns white;
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	and sign the wound with one line of about half a finger's length, and move your hand once, and cut deep enough that you do not hit the artery and reach the bone;
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	and beware of the mandible that mute when one chews, and the nerve should not be affected so that it mutes and so that no spasm comes to the patient, and beware of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, for cutting causes great fear especially in those who are unfamiliar with it and who are not experienced and practiced.
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and leave the work halfway through;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is cut, and I will show you in this book where it opens.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the disease and the patient suffers, cauterize him again on the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals.
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	and if you see, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on extracting an artery, using the cautery with two knives;
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	and this cautery is better and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain in the ears from coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is pain in the ear from cold, and one has applied dissolving medicines and other remedies that we have mentioned in the previous chapter, and the pain does not go away, then heat this cautery, which is called 'the point', whose composition is as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After pointing to all around the affected ear, or both ears if the pain is in both, move slightly above the root of the ear after you have marked the spot.
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	and make 6 points around each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	then clean the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	Wounds that should be cauterized are only those that cause bleeding, as we have said in the division of diseases;
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not cauterize those that appear to come from dryness and nerve spasm.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you treat this type of wound that causes bleeding from fluids and discharges from the head, and gargling does not help, then you must cauterize the patient with 3 cauteries:
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	one at the root of the ear, and the other a little way from the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips;
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	and apply the cautery to the part that appears healthy, and cauterize the top of the ear above a little below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as a finger;
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	and leave the cautery on until half of the heart is burned;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And the appearance of the scalpel that we have placed earlier, but it is a little more subtle and the knife should be a little thicker;
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After curing the site as I have said before, until it is healed.Et li chief de l’oreille metes un pic en la partie qui est entre les II levres et li nez;
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	If the apoplexy is old and you cure it as we have said, but it does not help, and the patient has a fever, then do three cauterizations:l’un en la racine dou col, et l’autre sus la nuque entre le col et la teste;et li tier entre les II mamelles;
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	II on the two horns of the head, and I in the middle of the head, and I in the place called "vessels", as we have said before, and the other cautery on the mouth of the stomach;
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	and let it be treated as we have said before.
de litargie	of litharge
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this illness, one must give the patient large herbs and purging pills to cleanse the brain;
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	after washing the head of the patient thoroughly, and put on the ointment of mustard which is written in the treatise on ointments;
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	and this is how the cautery is done:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	if you do as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If he is healed like this, it is good;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	and if he is not healed, then make three cauteries in the middle of the head going down to the neck, and space between each cautery two fingers wide;
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	and treat it like the others, and if you see it fitting, and the patient is enduring, then do the cautery in the middle.
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if necessary, do the others on the two horns, and treat it until it heals.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	and let the cautery be what is called "olive", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of chill from the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	The head should be cleansed of hair and of what we have said before,
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	after washing the head of the patient, then do the cautery in the middle of the head and on each horn, and behind and three times on the spine of the neck;
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is enduring, and the disease is strong, then do four cauteries on the spine of the back;
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	and let it be until the most of the heat has left, then lift your hand;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	after the wound has healed, and then use the cautery called "olive oil" which we have mentioned earlier.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use cautery except for those who are phlegmatic; it is necessary first to cleanse the brain of hair and other remedies that we have discussed in the division when the patient is great and suffering from taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is a child who cannot endure it, make a gargle and a mouthwash that purifies the brain often with good foods;
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	after the king has eaten, and then use the cautery as we have said before, and the cautery on the vessel, and on each horn;
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and if the patient is external and suffering, make a cautery as I have said for paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cautery be olive oil according to the manner that I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the disease is in a child, make him  .i. delicate cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When through the cause of melancholy there are corrupt humours and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with part cauteries as we said for the one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if through the cause of melancholy the superfluities are declining towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink that purifies the brain, according to what has been described before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After the king has eaten;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	Then make a well-made linen bandage, like a circle, and put it around his head;
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	and let the patient cross his legs, and keep them well held from all sides;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	then bring forward the linen, and cut off the hair of an old bearded goat;
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	and heat it gently over the fire so that the patient can withstand the heat when he drinks from the bottle;
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	then empty the bladder within through the neck, and let it cool;
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and do this to the patient once every week with good management until he is healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or, if you want to cauterize it all over, make several small points on the end of the cautery tool.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This cautery moistens the brain greatly;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	and then put on cotton wet with goat's milk and wax.
de l’awe des eulz	of their eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When awesomeness first comes to the eyes due to the signs I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient drink that cleanses the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make them sweat in a bath several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	Then he instructs the patient to lower his head, and he applies the cautery on his head, and performs 2 cauteries on the 2 temples if the decline of the eye is in both, or just one if it's only in one;
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	and cover all the veins and arteries below the heart with the cautery, and let the cautery be as long as the width of the temple;
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	and beware of bleeding, and if you see too much blood issue, then stop it with some clay powder as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you in the extraction of the arteries and the incision cautery how you should stop it;
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	and sometimes they make cauterization or incision under the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	of the body from tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When tears are old and accustomed, and on the veins, or within the arteries that lie near the appearance of the head outside;
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and it is seen that these are cold phlegmatic excesses, then you must do the cautery I mentioned earlier in the descending awl into the eyes:
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I cauterize inside the head, and 2 cauteries on the 2 temples, and 2 cauteries under the 2 bones;
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	and if there is more need, then cauterize the eye socket above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	where the body weeps inside them
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you have treated him according to what we have said in the section, and he does not improve, then give the patient three nights of bleeding;
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	afterwards bleed the head, and cauterize it with a cautery of olive oil;
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	and make two cauteries with a cautery called "clavis" above the two eye sockets, a little below the hairline;
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	and be careful of the artery that you do not pierce it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the membrane of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with the tool called "olive".
de coi ci est li forme:	It should be shaped in the following way:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see fit, make two cauteries above the eye sockets as long as the eyebrows are;
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and do not remove your hand until the third part of the paper is burnt, according to the manner I have described.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that pokes the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	At times the hair of the eyelids turns white, pricking the eye, and cauterization is performed in two ways:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	that is, with fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne,
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein;and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die. When they grow and are even, then put the patient in water; after that, draw on paper the shape of an eyeball, as well as the beginning of the sign from among the hairs;Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then I wet cotton with egg white and fennel seed paste on the eye, then heat the cautery so that it is the right shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After that, cauterize little by little over the shape you have marked, a little bit at a time, until the ulcer is burned in that place;
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	and the sign of health is when you see the papery skin retracted, and the hairs standing up at the edge of the eye;
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	then take your hand away, and leave it like that for three days; then wet cotton with butter to cool the burn.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if afterwards the hairs come back, and the papery skin is soft again, then start the cautery process over from the beginning, just as you did before.
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	and if the hairs are broken off, cauterize it so that the paper lifts to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The burning cautery of medicine is what you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf;
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	then take French soap and quicklime, of each one part, and grind them well together;
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	and make it into a paste quickly so that it does not cool, then spread it over the parchment in the shape of the myrtle leaf, and place the hairs on top;
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	and if the disease is only in one eye, then operate on that one, and if it is in both, then operate on both;
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and place under the eye moistened cotton in egg white;
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	and the head of the sick person is in great pain and puts his hand on the medicine, and presses it and moves it every time the patient feels biting from the medicine, because he feels the biting as much as fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the biting is passed, raise the area, and look if you see the paper raised as it was raised by the constraint of fire or by incision;
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	and if so, it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If not, then apply more medicine to the area where the medicine did not take effect, until your work is even and the eyes are in their proper place;
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put on wet cotton dipped in butter until the wound heals, after cleaning the area of the ointment which is called 'diaphenes' and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to take care of your work very carefully so that it does not leak into the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes soft afterward, and the hair pricks in the eye, then restart the medicine on that area which has been softened by the paper properly, just as you did before.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the cure until it is healed;
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and this is the shape of the blister:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And know that men's eyes are diverse in size and smallness, and according to that are your constraints;
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and the true way is not known to him whose study this art is.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	on the treatment of fistula with cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have described in the sections on diseases, and your treatments are not effective, then you should use cautery according to the following method:
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to put his head in your lap;
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and let the surgeon hold his head between his hands in such a way that he does not move or drop his head;
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	afterwards, put wet cotton in egg white or in parsley juice on the eye;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	then heat the cautery which is made thus:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	is shaved at the top so that it is shaped like a quill, along with which the cautery is held;
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	if you see it pointed from one end to the other, and if you see it as flat as a tent;
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	but nonetheless, the one that is shaved is best for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	Afterwards, press the fistula if it is open, and treat the pus, and dry it;
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	and if it is closed, open it and treat the bowels;
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	afterwards, put on the hot cautery, and hold your hand at the cautery near the corner of the eye, so that your hand does not make a mistake;
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of cautery up to the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If not, then use the cautery again, and if you need another one, leave it for 3 days;
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	after moistening cotton in butter, and the poultice of a drying ointment until it is healed, and if 40 days pass without healing, then apply the medicine of corrosive water until the bone is uncovered;
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and treat according to how it behaves in its own chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that some of the ancients spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	When treating a fistula, locate and open the passage;
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	afterwards, insert into the slit one-sixth of a bean of what it was formed from;
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and make it the size of a pea;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and hold your hand on the bean firmly so that the patient does not move, and so that the pus does not flow to the eye;
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and one should moisten cotton in wine or water and place it on the eye of the patient;
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	the bean then opens the passage of the fistula, and heals by a marvellous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we mentioned, that is good.Si li fistule ne fuist saine, et met en la fendure un pafre de fer de coi li fistule est venuz, et le met tant que li pafre soit en la fistule.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If the fistula is not healed, insert an iron probe into the opening from which the fistula has emerged, and push it in until the probe is inside the fistula. If that doesn't work, you must administer an enema to the nose, and bring the fistula back towards the nose according to where it should be in its proper location.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cracks occur on the lips which are called "hair", and especially on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have described in the sections, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small scalpel according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And he applies cauterization to these fissures until it reaches the bone;
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	afterwards, treat the area with ointment until it heals.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess forms at the root of the gum or uvula, or palate, or tooth roots, it causes swelling and suppuration, and becomes ulcerated and turns into a fistula.
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	and you treat it as we have described in the section on incisions, but it does not help:
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	therefore, you must use cauterization according to the size of the fistula.
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	afterwards, heat the iron and apply it to the opening of the fistula, holding your hand steady so that the hot iron touches the bottom of the wound.
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this once or twice, afterwards treating it as we have described for healing wounds, until it is healed.
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if it is cured thus, it is good;
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if not, then one must uncover the area and remove the corrupted bone, according to how you find it in its joint.
dou movement des dens	movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it does not help, then put the head of the patient in your lap:
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	after heat up the cautery which will be described below in such a way that you place a candle on top of the tooth;
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and hold the hot cautery in your hand until the patient feels the heat going to the root of the tooth;
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	then lift your hand and repeat the cautery as you wish;
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	then fill the patient's mouth with salt water and let it sit for an hour and spit often.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way, the tooth which was loose is made firm, and the soft gums restrained, and the corrupted moisture dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of toothache
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When toothache comes from cold, or there is coldness or paleness, and medical treatments don't work, then cautery is needed in two ways:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and butter cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	Butter cautery is such that you heat butter from a cow, and the tip in a spoon made of iron or bronze;
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	Afterwards, take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent pole, and moisten it in the butter, and place it on the aching tooth until it is cool;
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	And in this way, do it often until its power reaches the root of the tooth; and if you see the butter-soaked wool and cotton getting cold, and place it on the aching tooth, and hold the hot iron close to the gum of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The fire cautery together is such that you take an iron or bronze rod, and it should be thick so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient;
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After heating the cautery, from which the form will come, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, for the pain will be relieved that day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary for the patient to fill his mouth with good butter quickly after this cautery, and then rinse it out.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And here is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make a cautery of whatever you like, according to what you have power over;
et c’est li forme de la caine:	and this is the form of the dog's tooth:
des scrophules	of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When scrofula is of phlegmatic and cold moisture, and does not respond to digestion through medicine, then heat the cautery blade, as shown in the illustration, with two openings for the smoke to emerge from the other side of the cautery;
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	and place the hot cautery blade once on the abscess where it is needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess;
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess and leave it for three days;
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	and place wet cotton in butter over the burn until the burn is healed;
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the area with ointments and bandages until it is completely healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When moisture prevails over the channels of the stomach, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient should be purged first with medicines that loosen the bowels.
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	After this, make a cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful not to go too far into the throat, but only burn it lightly near the heart.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After this, make another cautery at the joint of the neck at the head of the spine, and use the cautery called 'clavicle' as described earlier.
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat the area until it is healed, as described earlier.Quant li chief de l’espinee est mal adjoigniez a la base dou chief, et li membres li plus ne se muevent
de la toust	of the tongue
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When the top of the spine is misaligned with the base of the head and the limbs do not move freely, and all diseases of the stomach are due to cold moisture, and the patient does not have a fever or dryness, and it is an old disease, then make the cauteries on the nerves as described earlier.
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and another cautery in between the two breasts;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	and let the cautery, which is called "clavicle," be according to the form that has been described earlier.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see fit, make a cautery on the spot with the cautery, which is called "pinpoint," according to the form described earlier in the ailment of the ears;
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	and let there be 30 points or more around it.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	Afterwards heal the place according to what was said before, and let the cauteries be in three lines according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for this reason, cauteries are gentler when you do them three times.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	Afterwards, the patient should be bled on their back and ribs;et li sang qui venoit de lor costeit entor et li col, qu’il soit retre
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	and the blood that comes from their ribs around their neck and throat, let it be gently pressed after gently lifting the sternum with your left hand's fingers;et soit li sang qui venoit de lor costeit entor et li col,
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is dislocated inside, scorch the cautery which has the nerves of the eyes, and here is the form:et soit li sang qui venoit de lor costeit entor et li col, qu’il soit retre
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and cauterize the vein until it is completely cut, and the figure of the cautery comes out together with four cauteries;
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	and for this reason cautery is made with the cautery that has three strings, so that the figures of cauterization are six cauteries;
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and the nerves follow the subtlety of a tent and this is the shape of the cautery that has three strings:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is adjusted above this one nerve, so that there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After, put on the cautery small pieces of silk;
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Afterwards, let the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until it is well healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, which happens rarely, then make cautery on the thick part of the cautery-clavicle, or many cauteries in points.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and moisture is eliminated and the illness is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and moisture come into the stomach, causing pain to its nature, and there are many catarrhs in him, and he does not benefit from customary treatments, then you must pour water on his back, and stretch out his legs and arms.And if he vomits with difficulty, do the same.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	After that, do three cauteries under the nail of the big toe, one cautery in the middle and two cauteries on either side so that the figures of the cauteries are at three angles, with an equal space between them so they do not touch when they bend due to pus;
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	and the cautery marks are so deep that they mark both parts of the chest, and the shape of the cauteries follows this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you want to cauterize a large area in the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	and whoever fears this cautery, cauterize a small area and sign on the stomach with one dot according to how much you want to do;
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	then cauterize it with what is called a 'point'.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound we have described above, once it has healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When the liver hurts from cold and moisture and excess flatulence, so much that it is out of its natural condition;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the disease is cured by what we have said in divisions, and if it does not help, the patient must be bled on his vein;
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and sign three cauteries according to this form and shape and quantity on the liver, avoiding the hypochondrium, where the ribs of man come;
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	and there must be a space between each cautery equal to the thickness of two fingers;
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	and the cauteries should be held lightly on the body, and do not press hard with your hand on the entire cautery;
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	and only the half of the cautery should be burned, and the patient should be laid straight on his back;
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	and if he cannot lie flat, then let him lie on his side, and stretch out his legs and lift up his hips;
et c’est li forme:	and here is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if you wish, cauterize these cauteries of the cupping glass, if you are skillful and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn all over the body, for then you would dry out the whole body;
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and do not go too deep, because the skin is very delicate there, and you can tell by looking.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When he has an abscess in his liver, and you want to know whether it is in the meat of the liver or in the membrane:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	if it is in the meat, the patient feels pain not too strongly;
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	and if it is in the membrane, he feels intense pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And then when this treatment has been applied to the abscesses, the patient should be laid on his back;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	and then sign with your finger on the spot where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar to a reed, so that it is red hot;
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	and cauterize with the cautery until the abscess is burnt, and goes as far as the membrane, until all the pus is driven out;
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the treatment, dress the wound until it is healed;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	and no one should ever use this cautery except someone who has studied the art of medicine for a long time, and through whose hands these diseases have sometimes been cured.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore he can work boldly, and nevertheless it seems to me that it is better to leave it.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of a cautery of phlegmon
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancients said that one must do cauterizations to the warts with roots of aristolochia, and in such a manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	take a root of aristolochia that is long, the largest one you can find, and dried, and as thick and long as your finger.
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	and moisten it in oil, and heat it over a fire, and do the cautery between the forehead and neck, and two smaller cauteries a little lower down on the part that is under the beard.
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	and two cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, slightly tilted backwards;
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	and one cautery between the buttocks, and one over the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on the sides of the buttocks opposite the cautery between the shoulders.
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	and do not press your hand, but do it smoothly as in perfumery.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And some ancients said that a person should use a fire cautery similar to a razor, and heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches that abscess;
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	and then jump out of pain, as we have said in the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear for the patient, who may die or develop a fistula that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouth
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the illness of the moon with what we have said in the divisions of treatment, and it does not help at all, then there are three methods of cauterization that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	Of these, one method is to make 3 or 4 cauteries, by marking according to the length of the vein, following the shape of the liver cautery which we described earlier;
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, but let the patient be careful on his back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	and another way of cauterizing is to heat the cautery which has 2 prongs, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and gently lift the skin where the vein is, or the side of the patient's body, and elevate it according to the shape of the body; the cautery should follow the shape of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	Afterward I place the two burning wires so that their tips pierce through to the other side, and then I draw them quickly out, and in this way there will be four wounds.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see that cautery is needed for all three nerves, cauterize with the full cautery.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cautery when it has healed for a long time, and this one is better than the other cauteries mentioned before.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not good for hydropsy, except in the way that is called "asclytes.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you have treated it according to the methods we have described in the sections, and your treatment does not help, then you must make four cauteries around the navel, one over the stomach, one over the liver, one over the abdomen, two behind the back on the spine, and one between the buttocks;
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and the cautery should be close to the center of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	Afterward leave the cautery open to drain pus for a long time, and do not abandon the treatment of the patient after the cautery;
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	and healing would hasten, and the two intentions would come together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The form of the cautery for the belly is the key that we have shown you before:
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	and those for the back should be olive-shaped, as shown here.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen in one who is dropical, and are filled with yellow water, you must cauterize on the sole of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger;
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	and move your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not go in too deeply, thus you will avoid the yellow awl, and the cautery should be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	After that, make two cauteries on each leg at the tip of the shank bone;
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	and let the cauteries be long, one below the knee in front and the other above, in the middle of the leg;
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	and leave the cauteries to heal slowly without bandaging, until the water comes out;
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	after the treatment of other wounds that we have discussed.
de la menoison	of menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When diarrhea comes from cold or moisture, and the retaining and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by other remedies;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	and you see the patient suffering greatly and in great need of help, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been said before about the cautery on the stomach, using the circulating cautery;
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	and four small cauteries around the navel for each cautery with a thin needle, and two cauteries on the hips;
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see an abundance of moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the shoulder, and one cautery on each elbow, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good support.
de la cure des emorroydes	on the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When the hemorrhoids are in the anus, one or more of them, and are old and consist of thick cold and moist corruption, and they have been treated by division as we have described, but to no avail, then make cauteries:
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	III on the spine of the back, that which is all defused underneath, little by little in a triangular shape, and I cauterize underneath the armpit II times;
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	and if you think his stomach is cold, and the meat is not cooking, and one sees the face swollen, then on the face with I great cautery on the stomach, as it is before said, and I another on the liver, and I another on the mouse all cauterized with a clave;
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	and let the cautery remain open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After curing the site until it heals.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness that is called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you cup the thumb, if it burns the cautery which seems like the razor, and then put it all burning on that thumb cupped;
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and let your hand remain so that the cauteries come to the beginning of the vein, from which the blood flows;
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	do this once or twice, and if there is much of the thumb, cauterize each one as we have said;et se li cautere ne viegne pas ou sans cort, si met le cautere sus la voine et li estraint tant qu’il ne se muege.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	after the treatment of wounds is beneficial as long as they are healed.
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	and if you cauterize with a large cautery made from alchorum, it will have greater effect.
de plaie mal curee	of an improperly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will discuss in its place, then such a disease comes that it cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is a fistula and it has a pus discharge and corrupt moisture, then you must probe it with a thin rod and be careful to feel how deep the rod goes.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After heating the cautery until it is as hot as a razor, insert it into the fistula according to the amount that the tent has entered it, and repeat the cautery until the diseased and rotten flesh is burned, once or twice or three times, depending on the amount that is needed.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	and be careful not to burn the nerves that are nearby, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	if the fistula goes to the bladder and intestines, be careful of these places, and do not make that fire too strong, and think that it is not sensible.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	after curing the place until it is healed, and if the wound is salted, and the matter has been discharged for a long time, then you can be sure that the wound is completely healed.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	and if the matters are not removed, know that the place is pierced, and the bones at the bottom are corrupted;
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	and thus, as one of those we will discuss in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When a cold pain comes with heavy rainfall and strong winds, and it does not lessen in a woman, then you should cauterize her on the rainy side of the body using the hot iron we mentioned earlier;
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will do more good.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then you should cauterize in the lower part above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic hair start, and on the right and left, and each cautery should be as long as a finger;
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	and make the fire cautery on his back, or wherever you need to;
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	and the cautery should be made according to the previously described shape.
de la marris	of the mouth
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the wound is cold and moist, and does not allow for healing, and the flowers are腐 and their seasons are late;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they do come, there is great pain;
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	therefore, one must make three cauteries around the wound, as we have said in the bladder cautery, and two fire cauteries on the back;
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and the cautery should be made according to the previously described shape.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When the viscous moisture descends to the box of the hip, and because of this it dislocates from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when one measures them together;
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and if the place is found hollow, then one must cauterize the patient on the hip at the first cautery similar to a circle, and draw before the place around the hip as it turns, so that the hip is within the circle;
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	and if it is such cautery as they use to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if this cautery is not available, make three large cauteries of the olive oil, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the others;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and heal until it is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the hip pain
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When there is pain in the hip joint, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the disease is cured by what we have said in the section on dislocations but the cure does not work, and the disease is old:
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	then you should purge the patient of the gross humors with stinking pills, or other good smelling pills similar to them.Et si li maux vient de la moelle, et qu’il se traveille par grant froidor, adonc covient il que tu le chaleures tout a l’ent
Aprés li fai cautere;	After that make him a cautery;and if the pain comes from the marrow, and it travels
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	and the way of the cautery is according to two ways:la I. est que tu le fai cauteres sus la teste et sus les costes de l
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	this is to know together burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cautery has many ways, one of which is as follows:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	that you cauterize on the hip III cauteries triangularly according to this shape, and make them deep and wide, and between each cautery there is a space the thickness of a thumb, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped;
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	sometimes cautery is done in the middle on the head of the hip, so that there are IV according to this shape:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you wish, cauterize with a round cautery as we mentioned before in the dislocation of the hip;
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	but do it so that the circles contain all of the hip, and all of the thickness of the heart is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	This is the method used for sciatica, when the pain is located in the hip and does not travel down to the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it comes to the thigh and leg, make II cauteries where the patient says the pain is, and above the ankle IV inches, a little on the left side;
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	and let the cautery be with a scalpel, and burn away the thickness of the skin.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if the pain extends to the toe or near there, cauterize where he feels the pain three times or four with the cautery that is called a "point.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if it's necessary, do more.
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if he feels that the pain is under his knee toward his thigh, cauterize with a scalpel or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cautery on so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who had cautery applied to the ankle of the foot, and they left it until the leg was completely swollen, and the foot too, and it became pierced and corrupted throughout the foot.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a stomachache which caused his death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, apply cautery to one and then the other, according to this method.Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the wise men say about cautery to the hip, and here is how it's done: make a rod as thick as a thumb or a little less at one end and between the joints and from one joint to another in space the quantity of a finger nail.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	and let the tongs be of two parts, and also like noses, and have one handle of well-made iron.
et c’est li forme:	And this is the shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And let it be heated until it is all red and dripping with grease, and then place it over the box of the affected hip, and turn it over to the sound side. And then:
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	And cauterize it once with the cautery and leave it for three days;
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	and then make an ointment of butter, and let the wound remain open for a long time.
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the application of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasim says that we use this cautery sparingly due to the fear of its appearance, and those who see it used sparingly.
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Nevertheless, it is a good cautery for those who can endure it, and it lies where it afflicts them.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The medicine cautery burns if you make the instrument in between the joints so that it descends the edge of the door, and it is made of brass or iron with a long surface, and in its height it has 2 inches, and between each one there is the thickness of a thumb;
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and they are open below and above, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	After placing the box of the hip on the patient lying on his healthy side, and pressing your hand hard on the box of the hip;
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After pouring between the two circles of the hot wax which is heated in the fire for a moment, and the patient endures the heat and burning of it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For there is biting as well as from fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	And when the biting is passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip gently, and leave it so for three days, and place butter on it until what is black from the scorching is removed;
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and let him leave it for three days until the pus drains out;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and that would be the final treatment after the poultice until he is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make the instrument that colors like salt according to what you did in the hip dislocation;
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	and this is the way of making the hot plaster, and I have written it in the treatise on rectifications of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkaline and quicklime, as much of each, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	there should be a small hole so that the point of a hairpin can enter it;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and put on top of it another pot well-plumbed, and put on top alkali and chalk and the hot plaster on top, until there is two fingers of powder above what you have well mixed in your hand;
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and let it be so until the powder drips down into the plumbed pot, then take all that powder and pour it on top of the chalk and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And then there will be a great deal of fever, and it is administered with many types of medical treatments and cauteries on other limbs.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it does the same work as fire, and there are other medicines with which one can cauterize the hip just like this: theriac, and honey from the anhard tree, and chalk with soap; mix all these things together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a cure whereby a man was cured of the pain in his hip and sciatic nerve, and he praised it highly, saying that nothing else was done to him, but that he was cured at one time when this treatment was carried out, and that he then took a bath as instructed below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And take the litharge in this way: crush it with a little grease, and put it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is, and leave it there.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	Let it stay for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning.Et si li dolour se retent en autre lieu por le quel il ne peut demourer a son lit, dist en telle maniere qu’il soit asez
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then let him enter the bath until his body is a little aroused, and let him enter the bed, and the pain will leave completely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such medicine after an evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's dung, it helps a lot, says Dioscorides.et quant li dolour se retent en la cheville et en la cuisse et en la jambe et ne peut demourer a son lit, dist en telle maniere que il soit asez
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and the cautery must be performed in such a way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take lamb's wool and grease it with old oil, and place it in the socket between the big toe and the one next to it, which is called the sciatic socket.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	Take dry goat's hair, and heat it in fire until it is charred, then place it on wool, and leave it until it turns to ash.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	And do this again, and keep doing so until you feel it reach the hip and the pain stops.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	This method of cautery is called "goat's hair cautery.
de la dolor dou dos	of back pain
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When back pain comes from sitting or impact or excessive evacuation, or due to cold matter spreading, in none of these cases is cautery beneficial except for that which comes from the infusing of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	After that, the patient must be purged of foul pills or similar things, by making lines on his back, where the pain is, three lines marked in, and in each line make V cauteries or more depending on the strength and quantity the patient can endure.
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	And the cautery must be performed according to the cautery called "point."et si li mals son gres, tu li faices en chescune ligne X ou XII cauteres; et s
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	and if you see, do three cauteries or four with the key cautery tool according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	This disease often affects young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a tight neck when they wake up, and fear.
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	and you will find it in the last vertebrae of the spine and in the appearance of the others that come above them.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and cure it, cauterize it with the hot iron according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery purples each part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery two or three lines apart, and have the points close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	Afterwards heal the site until it is healthy according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply cautery in gangrenous areas that are in a nerve ganglion.
de la dolor des jointes	The vertebrae of the neck are at the base of the skull. And when you want to cure the spine, if you cannot get the spine to be healthy according to what we have said, then cure the area where the strain is and do not put the cautery on it, because the nerves are close to the head.
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When joint pain is from moistors that are expanded in each part of the body, and when it comes in the feet, which the doctor properly calls «podagra», and when it is from a cold cause and does not heal with treatment and medicine, then it is healed by cautery in such a way:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	make the mouth of the cautery tool around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery tool be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is a need to prick the sole of the foot, then do cauterization all over with the "point" cautery.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains come to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then make cautery on each knee with three cauteries or four of each part, all of it olive cautery.
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	and if you need more, then do more, but do not hold your hand against it longer than until the surface of the heart is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and back, administer the cautery that we have described in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the wrist two lines;
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	and if there remains no pain in the fingers, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	and if the pains come to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize each part and treat the patient well and take medicine.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give him good treatment and purge the phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rotgut wound
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When diarrhea comes in anger, and the bowels descend to the anus and it is new, then when you see him healed, he should not eat that day;
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and that he uses things that leave the belly slack, so that the bowels descend from his belly;
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	Afterwards, let him sit on his back between your hands, and command that he tightens his belly until the bowels are pushed back in, and draw them up to your fingers, and sign with oil underneath the wound on the bone of the elbow, and all over a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body;
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then heat the cautery with which this form is made:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it is white and it oozes pus.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then put the bowels back in their place;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	And the assistant tightens his hand so that they do not return;
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	And well squeeze the thighs for the patient, and put a pillow and a servant under the thighs, and another on the foot that squeezes his hands;
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	Then put the cautery on the sign all around your hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, do it again until you reach the bone;
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and guard carefully that the boil does not burst when you perform the cautery;
que tu ne le brulasses;	so that you do not burn yourself;
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and so that the patient does not die, or suffer other ills.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And you should know that when you do not come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is necessary that children's cauteries be smaller according to their size, and those of large people also larger according to their size;
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	after 3 days treat the site of the cautery with butter until the scorching is healed;
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	afterwards treat with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days so that the wound heals well;
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	and it is necessary to let his bandages be loose for a long time so that the boil does not burst when he tries to move around.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, if a well-made bandage is provided for him, and he wears it for another 40 days;
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	and has good rest, works little, and avoids too much drinking and eating, and too loud a voice.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And when he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will now describe the treatment for cutting on his shoulder.
de la routure dou ventre	from the disease of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When ulcers come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they are not growing any more, then make the cautery according to its quantity, and burn the third of the skin.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	After the cauterization, according to what we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	And some of the ancients say that one should cauterize with a three-pointed cautery according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the place of entry and draw a line across the width above the ulcer, and one from side to side, and hold your hand steady throughout the cauterization.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cautery is lighter and gentler.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in a limb, from falling or from injury, and the pain lasts a long time, and medical treatment does not help, then it must be cauterized with the iron that is called "point", and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb, its thinness and weakness, and its distortion and pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	If it is healed by the first cauterization, that is good;« Si la plaie ne guérit pas avec le premier cautère, répétez l'opération
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If it does not heal with the first cauterization, repeat the operation on that one, because such is the custom that it should change in the member nearest to it, so you must perform the cauterizations until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	from mixing
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The ulcers are sometimes helped by cautery with great difficulty, especially those that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	But if you see cauterization, take care that the disease is in its early stages, and it has been cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not progress or remain, and you doubt that the corruption will spread throughout the illness; then do five cauteries on the head:
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	one in the middle of the forehead, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hairline;
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and two on the two horns, and one behind on the nape of the neck;De quoy que li cauteres fuit faits sus le chief, qu’il soit en son comencement, car
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and let the cauteries on the head be done in their early stages, and let your hand remain so that the cauteries reach the bone, and as long as the blisters come out so that the vapors of the thick humors can emerge;Et se li maladie est de longue duree et granz escorces en issent, qu’il fuit tant qu’el escorce fuie crever, ou fuie s’escorce crever adessous, et ne
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	and cauterize the mole according to what it is in front of you.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the hair is sparse everywhere;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and it is losing hair obviously, then you must cauterize it with these cauteries that we have mentioned on the head, and 1 cautery on the nape of the neck, and 2 cauteries on the spine of the neck, and 6 cauteries on the spine of the back, and 1 large one on the croup and another one next to it, and 2 ones on both shoulders;
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	and 2 cauteries on the elbows, and 2 cauteries on the tendons of the feet, and 1 cautery on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and be careful with the nerves that are on the lower back, so that you do not burn them;
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	sometimes they make 1 cautery on the bone of the wrist, and 1 cautery on the bone of the stomach, and 1 cautery on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And you should know that the more cauterization is done, the more help it provides, and movement benefits.
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	and you should know that the patient does not feel pain from cauterization as a healthy person would, because their body is already entirely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and the joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	Afterwards, clean the site with flour from wheat with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When swelling comes to a limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it is not healed, then you should apply cauterization on the limb according to its size.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	And let the cautery be slightly inserted into the thickness of the skin;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And sometimes cauterization is done on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that numbs the limb, and thus the swelling is removed;
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	and nevertheless, no one should perform this unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves that move the body.
de albaras	of poplars
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the disease called "albaras" is awake, and the skills of medicine are worthless, then cauterize with a cautery tool slightly deeply, according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin, so that the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	then treat with a poultice of wheat flour and lentils, with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood from the gut and blood from almond stones, each one part.
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and let it air in the sun until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of cancer by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When cancer appears at its beginning, and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with a cautery that looks like a circle, all around the edge of the cancer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And yet, the wise say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the ulcer:
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	and yet I do not think that is good, because I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen that happen more than once;
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	and a straighter thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery which is called 'circle', as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling which cannot subside
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When someone has a disease called 'adubelati', and it delays death due to excesses it causes or due to the age of the illness when it is decrepit (that is, too old) and they have little blood, or because of the time;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you see her hastening to die:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	then cauterize it all around with many small cauteries by pricking;
aprés le laisse ensi.	afterwards, leave it like that.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten to death.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing all the way through, then heat the cautery with which it was formed:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the heart, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels them driving out in such a way that the course of the illness is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Afterwards, treat it until it is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cautery by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	There is another type of disease that is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a corruption of a limb, for it corrodes the limbs just as fire burns dry wood.Si tu vois qu’ele est corroyssans, et li membres ne fuent pas troz lons, si covient qu’il soit treffez entor de la maladie par cauteres petis en tel maniere que li cauteres s’entrecongnast en la porriture, si com il adouce la maladie.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this disease in a place which can withstand fire cautery, then heat the cauteries, both small and large, according to what is needed for the location of the illness;et s’il est en leu ou il ne soffre point de cautere a feu, adonques tu tiens les cauteres claviles en la main si que ele soit chaufees, et li malade soit en leu ou il ne fust pas moult eschaude, et embreint les cauteres sur
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	after you have cauterized it all over until you reach all the corruption and nothing of it remains, so that everything that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and apply soft bandages with oil on the cauterized areas until the burns from the fire are healed, and all the corruption is removed.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After that, treat it with ointments that generate warmth.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if you see after 3 days that healthy flesh does not grow, that is good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	and if not, then restart the cautery on what has remained of the corrupted tissue.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this ulcer is sometimes cured with medicine instead of fire cautery;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	but nevertheless, fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already discussed the cure for medicine ague in the division:
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of warts that appear on the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that from the feet a disease arises which is called in our language "clot", and it is a large diseased mass that blocks the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this disease has two methods:
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cautery and hot water cautery.Or cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulx qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Fire cautery is what you heat up until the cautery tool becomes as hot as a feather and is made of good iron to the size that it can pierce the nail from all sides, and it has fine edges;
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	Afterwards, place it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail.
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	And let it be thus for three days until it begins to produce pus;
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Then make a poultice of wild mallows bruised with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall off and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the area with an ointment that promotes healing until it is cured.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they turn inward into the body, and many times they occur in hands and feet, then you must treat them with hot water cautery;
et est en teil maniere:	And it is in such a way:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	Take an iron or bronze rod, or a wire of vulture, and place it on the nail and the warts, that is to say, calluses;
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	And place the rod on it so that it wraps around, then put a little hot water on it, and hold your hand steady, and press your hand as you turn so that the edge of the rod reaches the root of the nail, and thus the hot water can find its way deeply to the root;
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	and let the patient endure the biting of hot water for a little while.
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	then leave it thus, and it will tear out all at its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another, until you draw out all those who are in the body, then heal them of the wounds that cause pus.
li cure dou trembler	the cure for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When someone trembles from coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever or other, then you should make 4 cauteries on the spine in the back, one cautery between each vertebrae:
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and one cautery on the penis and one over the stomach with an olive-sized cautery;
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	this will cease the trembling and hasten the healing of the cold illness.Si li ners le faict trembler, il covient que tu prennes un poil de l’espece du mala
des pustules puans	of stinking pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes they appear as sores on the skin, or as foul pustules, which come from putrid humors.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	If it's the nerves that cause the trembling, then one must take a hair from the species of the patient and cauterize each head of the pustule with it:et si li poil ne fuert de l’espece du malaide, il cov
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	and if the hair is not from the species of the patient, then a slender stick of myrtle wood should be used, with its tip taken to the fire, or a long root of aristologist, or with a lenticular cautery.Quant la pustule est rompue, si covient que li cauteres soit apaisiez, et les cauteres soient de fust de
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And sometimes they cauterize them at the beginning when they appear, according to this method, and they cannot grow from thereforth, but the excess from which they come is disrupted, and they are healed.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	But it should be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Many times there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound, or at the incision of an abscess, or with the cautery on the limb, and in similar things;
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	and it is a very grieving thing to staunch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And yet, when this happens to someone, you must hurry to place your index finger over the wound of the vein, and hold it very tightly until the blood is subdued underneath your finger, and no drop comes out;
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	then put into the fire the olive-oil cauteries, some small and some large, until they are all red;
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Take the cautery, whether large or small depending on the wound and where the artery is located, and apply it to that vein in your hand you are holding, and hold the cautery there until the blood is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it bleeds afresh when you lift your finger from the wound, and the cautery has cooled, then quickly take another of the cauteries which are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not stop doing this one after another until the blood is stanched.
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	And be careful not to burn the nerve which is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient;
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	And know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be stanched easily if the artery is large, except by one of the four methods we have described:
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by tightly binding with a thread, or by medicines applied that have the power to stanch blood.
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And it should be bound and constrained skillfully.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers a tight binding with cloth or placing hot objects on it, or other similar treatments, will not benefit if only a little.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to someone and they have no mirror or medicine at hand, then they should put their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press hard until it is stopped above the wound and above the vein;
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	and do not move the finger, but moisten it with cold water often so that it is very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and stopped.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	and ask around for what they need in terms of cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of wound treatments
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases that need fire cauteries, or burning medicines, and their properties and causes, and the instruments and forms of the cauteries;
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	and have placed this chapter from the head to the feet, and I will go through this same path in this chapter so that one can more easily find what they want.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so that I begin this, my dear son, you must learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and therefore greater caution is needed.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and making an incision over an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to attempt foolishness.Car li sang est en nos corporeux, et ne puet on que li corps soit en vie, si li sang ne soit en lui: car il li sustent et le meintient.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For there are many types of people who come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	if they come from such who have changed so little with their illness that it is easily dispelled by the treatment they receive for their illness, and because of the severity of its nature;Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques cov
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	and from these one should fear.Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu,
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And of these there are those who give their senses and say:Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am wounded.
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the illness is devastating.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	You should not indulge those who come to you with such behavior, but place greater importance on your honor than your desires. Do not act foolishly but wisely in what you know and can obtain, and:
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	use prophecy and diagnosis in curing your illnesses so that salvation may be achieved.
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	and this will help you achieve a good reputation, glory, and memories of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, may Our Lord give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have arranged this chapter in a conversational manner, according to what is before the chapter on cauteries, which I have discussed for you from the head to the feet, so that you can find more easily whatever you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	Know that this disease often occurs in children when the head is compressed too strongly during childbirth; and:et alergeance du baille, ou il est mort.
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	and sometimes it comes from an unknown cause that no one knows about.And sometimes it comes from a cause that is not understood.Et parfois, il vient de la mère qui ne
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	I have never seen this disease except in children, and in all cases that I have witnessed, death was swift.And sometimes it comes from the mother not:wanting to breastfeed her child;
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	and for this reason I think it is better to divide the treatment into several parts.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and his neck swelled every day so that he could not support it;
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and believed that the moisture was so great that it killed him, and this moisture had gathered under the bone above the throat, between the brain and the bone;
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and the treatment is such that if the moisture is between the brain and the bone, and the abscess is small, you should make a large incision in the head;
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and it should be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture flows out;
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and here is the form of the spatchcock:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the edges of the head are open in every part, and water sprays out when you press it with your hand from inside, and this does not stop:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	if you must split open the head, make three slits in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	After the incision, remove all moisture with force.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After closing the slits with cloth and powder, pour wine and oil into them, and leave it for five days.
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Then loosen the wound with tenting and poultices, and let the head hang freely, giving the patient dry food to eat until the limb is healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another way of cutting is that you observe where the abscess is opening, and the gathering of pus:
car aucune fois est elle devant;	because sometimes it opens in front,
aucune fois derrier;	sometimes behind;
aucune fois en destre;	sometimes on the right side;
et aucune fois en senestre.	and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	So cut where the abscess is opening and the pus gathering, and make the slit according to your ability;
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and be careful not to cover the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and let blood flow, so that the patient dies from the loss of blood and the release of moisture.
de reume	of gout
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When someone has a disease called "cataract" in their eyes or feet, and the disease is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the best treatment is cauterization with which one will cut the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	Therefore, when you see them covered, have the patient lean back;
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	then rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries show through, then press the patient's neck hard against the cloth;
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	then look where the vein beats, and the spots on both sides are after the ears, and they are pushed back;
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	then sign the spots inwards, then cover one and the other with a sharp spatula, two parts wide, so that the spatula comes up to the bone, and this should be done from the side of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it, push the spatule under the artery and cut it from above, cutting also as deep as two parts across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, the blood will continue to spurt upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not open to the touch, then you must measure the thickness of three beans, then sign inwards and cut up to the bone;
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	and the amount of blood to be let will vary, depending on the case, usually around six ounces, but sometimes a little more or less, depending on what the patient can tolerate and the repletion of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	then examine the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	if there is a punctured bone without pus, and the wound is closed, then open it up and clean it out, treating it with ointment until it heals.
de emigrainne	of emetic
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old-age dementia comes, and the catarrh is acute, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and ancient madness and similar things, and it is treated by various methods of medicine and all that does not help him, then we should extract the arteries in the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	The method of extraction is to have the patient push back his hair from his temples, and listen to the artery that opens at the temple, for it can be felt beating strongly in some people with a very weak pulse.
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	If the pulse is weak, then have the patient press his neck with a cloth, and then rub the area with some rough cloth, and wash it with warm water until the artery beats strongly.
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	then take the spathe of which this is the shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	then skin the flesh lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it upward with tweezers, and separate it well from the tissues that are underneath it in each part;
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	and if the artery is thin, then return to the hook's point, and cut off that part according to the quantity of the two parts.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, then the sickness will not leave his body at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And draw out the blood from the sixth part up to the third;
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	and if the artery is large, then it is necessary to tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk so that pus does not come before the wound heals, and that blood comes out smoothly;
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	then cut off the excess between the two ligatures in that same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a hot blade up to the bone until the shoulder is cut through;
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	and it is a bad disease if the patient has fever and he is of a hot temperament.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For cautery helps to end moisture:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	therefore it is of greater help for moistness.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	Or, one should, for the extraction of an artery, fill the area with old cotton and place it under a well-made tent;
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and when one removes them, use dry medicines that cause the birth of flesh, and of tents, until they are healed;
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	and if, without cutting of the artery as much as you operate, you hasten to cover by cautery, then employ the area with vitriol and constrict it with your hand so that the blood is stanched;
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	and if you do not have that at hand, then put your finger on the area until the blood congeals, and wet the area with cold water until the bleeding stops, and constrict as is appropriate;
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	and that which is easier and lighter in the extraction of the artery is to cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery of two parts, but the cutting parts should be well spaced to distribute their heat over a longer period.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too thin, it holds its heat less firmly.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And it should have between the two knives one finger's width of space, and then when you've marked both places, place the hot iron on until it reaches the bone, and close the vein in two places.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	And they should be distanced between the two shoulders because it is not souded by this cautery all over all over;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears of the eyes are descending from the veins that are on the forehead of the head, and it does not benefit from any medicine that is applied, and you see the face of the patient turn red, and feels in the forehead movement as if of trembling;
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and if they are painful and moist so that the hairs of the eyelids have fallen out, and the eyelids are swollen and scalded by the heat of tears, then this treatment is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And the ancient called it "cured by a blow", and it is that you do to the patient who has this disease, the hairs on his forehead, then make III incisions on his forehead evenly according to the length of his forehead;
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	and one of the incisions as deep as two fingers right in the middle of the forehead going down, and the other two on either side above the eyelids, and be careful not to cut into the arteries that are on either side above the eyelids;
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	and keep your hand away from the jaw, and let each incision be as deep as three fingers across the joints;
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	and have ready a piece of sponge and a lot of linen to wipe up the blood, then insert the spatulum, split into two parts as shown in the figure:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	from the incision which is cut from the temple all the way to the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	and scrape all the flesh which is between the two cuts all the way to the sinus that is over the bone, then do likewise from the middle cut all the way to the other second one, and then pull out this spatulum.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Then insert into the first incision the instrument that is called  "cultellary", and it is very sharp on one side, and not at all sharp on the other, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And cut the coat according to the shape of the chest, and the lower part towards the bone, and bring it together until it reaches the middle slit.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head into the eye socket until the incision is continuous all the way to the sinus, and then likewise do in the middle cut all the way to the other one outside;
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	and then draw out the blood equally, and express the place where the blood is taken from;Et s’il avint qu’en l’un des II cotés il soit si grant dolor que li malsens ne
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	then put into each wound a tent of old cotton, and place over it wet cloths soaked in wine, oil, and garlic, and be careful that hot abscesses do not develop.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	On the third day, loosen the bandage and give him a large drink of cold water, then treat the wound with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other remedies used for wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	from the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When someone has a catarrh and you see their eyes are sunken and small, and their vision is weakened, and the eyelids are burned:
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	and the hair falls out, and they feel pain in the head, and the sick person sneezes;
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	then you may know from these signs that those materials and this catarrh come from many veins, and the mother's milk is what it is, and so it is cured.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you must instruct the patient to look straight ahead, then make a large slit in the forehead, and another one from the corner of the eye.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And begin from the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision all the way to the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and keep your hand away from the nerves in the temples that control swallowing;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is exposed, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, and then pack between the two lips of the incision cotton wool and linen bandages;
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	then apply dampened fabrics in wine and oil, and beware of a hot abscess;
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	when it is removed, you should rub the bone until it begins to form a callus, then treat it with drying agents that promote the hardening of new bone.
En teil maniere:	In this way:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	take two parts of flour of wheat, and four parts of colofoint, and make a poultice of it;
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	and administer it to these wounds to promote healing throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the treatment of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	All that which falls out from the ears is one of four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	or beans, or a beast, or a stone from a mine, or something similar like iron;
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	or seeds such as peas, beans, and lentils;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	or flowing substances such as water, oil, and vinegar, and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it falls into the ear, whether a pebble or something else that does not adhere to the ear nor grow in it, one must hold the ear towards the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see a stone, then distil some violet oil or oil of mastic, and then apply an extractant;Si est beste, s’il li traveist la piere, si distille l’oile sus l’enduit, ou si li traveit la beste, si dist
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	If it is a beast, if the stone pierces through, then distil the oil on the wound, or if the beast bites him, distil and cause sneezing with a condiment, and stop the nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put a piece of cloth or wool around the ear;Si est semence, si enduit li pueilz de l’oreille et met l’espece de la sem
et estent l’oreille au desus.	If it is a seed, anoint the lobes of the ear and put the species of the seed on top.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Many times comes out by this cure;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come out, then administer extraction with delicate tweezers, of which there is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If it pops out with the tweezers, that's good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	if not, then administer extraction with a small, thin needle;
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	and if it does not come out with that, then make a small needle of bronze and push the tip of the needle into the ear canal firmly, and pack around the needle with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the needle;
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	then pull it out gently, because many times it comes out as we have said;
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	and if it does not come out in such a way, then take tweezers and grab the object, and place some instrument that is suitable for doing so, and put a little cotton around it;
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	then press the buttocks against the stone or whatever it is, and pull out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	If it does not come out from all these things we have said, then quickly split the ear so that the abscess, callus, and spasm can come out;
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	and the way to make the split is that you first bleed the patient from the head, and draw blood according to its strength, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear upwards, and cut a small opening at the root of the ear into the fat where it depends;
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	and the incision should be like a moon, as you go to the stone, then suck it energetically with your mouth;
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	treat until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if it is a graze that is in and it swells, then administer extraction;
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	and if it cannot emerge, then administer Spatula tenui subtilis according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision on that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not do this when you think the graze is moist due to moisture from the ear, until you have made many pieces;
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	then extract it with tweezers and with a suction device, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the water that drains from the ear, the patient should first sneeze with snuff, and plug the ear with cotton wool.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	Let him lie on the same side as the ear ache is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	if it jumps out by itself, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	if not, then take many small stones according to the length of your finger, thin and light, and heat them slightly in the fire;
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	and I put a hole in the patient's ear, and pierce it from another part of his foot, and pierce another stone on the stone that is in the ear;
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and do not stop piercing stone with stone until all the pus flows out, and so it will flow out completely;
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	and if you see that they take a straw and insert one end into the ear, and the other end is held to the fire until the most painful part of the straw is burned;
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	then do the same with other straws until all the pus flows out, as we have said for the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In removing a foreign object from an animal, if it is of a small body, such as a flea and similar objects, remove it as we have said in the division;
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if it is of a large body that can be felt, then use tweezers to extract it;et s’il est si petit qu’il ne soit nule part senti, si prend asche, et frotte li chiés
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	and it is the easiest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section on distillations, and the treatment is ineffective, then you should examine the ear in the sunlight:
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	if no worms appear, then pinch the ear lobes gently; if none emerge, then take a small needle and pierce where the shape of the worm is visible:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it is narrow below and broad above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	and insert the thinnest end into the ear according to the amount of pain the patient is experiencing, then suck firmly on the needle;
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	do this repeatedly until all the worms emerge.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not come out, then stop up the ear with cotton as I have said regarding stones;
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	and if they do not emerge as described, then administer the distillations that the ancients have experimented with for worm removal, and you will find them in the section on distillations;
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this apparatus, from which is the shape as you see it:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And whether it is of silver or bronze, there should be a small hole underneath and a larger hole above for distillation;
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	and to press the distillation into the apparatus, made of well-crafted bronze, and if you see fit, take a razor and wrap it around the point with cotton;
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	then pour your oil or juice, and whatever you desire from your medicines into the canal, and the canal should be in the ear;
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	then put the razor wrapped in cotton inside, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled into the ear canal;
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	and let the patient feel it inside, and let the distillation be heated over fire so that it may be distilled into the ear;
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	and be sure it is not too cold, for the medicine would not then be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the treatment of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born without ears;
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	and the same thing happens in adults through punctures of the ear, or by a boil forming inside the ear, and sometimes this swelling goes right into the ear, so that it cannot be seen;
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	and sometimes there is only slight damage to the eardrum, which can be seen quite clearly.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	When the eardrum is punctured and cannot be seen, it is a serious condition in many cases, and when one can see it, you should expose the ear of the patient to the sun;
et regarde dedens:	and look inside:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	if you see the membrane exposed, then treat it in the following way:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And it should be sharp and smooth all around so that it does not pierce the ear;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	if the operation is on the skin of the ear, hold it with fine pincers and lift gently until the skin is completely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the obstructions are deep in the ear, then take a thin, light scalpel and heat it gently in the fire, then place it on the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel the operation on the skin, pierce it gently and be careful not to cut into the nerves of the ear;
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	then put in the ear a tent according to the size of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do this for several days until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and dust with ground vitriol;
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and if you see swelling in the ear, it is necessary to remove the tent and replace it with another tent moistened with cerotic ointment made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then dress the wound until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if there is bleeding, take a sponge and cloth dipped in cold water and apply it to the ear, and use other remedies that stop the bleeding that are used for distilling.
de la char des papieres	of paper charcoal
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	This treatment comes from papers made of them when they are moist and dry; you should extend them with tweezers and pincers, and the edge of a spatula from its roots.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Then place powdered vitriol over the area.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if there is skin in it, then cauterize with a delicate lens-shaped cautery instrument, and the cauterizer after the incision is worth a mouse.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	And many times they return, as long as nothing remains of their roots.
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of hail
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Many times there come from the papers things that look like gravel in form and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "gout", and it is a gathering of thick moisture above and below the paper.
li ovraiges est telz:	such are the tasks:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	take care that the warts do not move from one place to another, and this is an easy thing to know;
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	then make a deep cut in it, then scrape each part lightly with a knife, and then grab it with tweezers and pull it out.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	if you cannot pull it out without piercing the skin a little, do not worry about hurting the patient;
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	and if the wound is large, then sew it up and treat it until it heals;
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	and if it is small, do not use force, as the oil will restore it immediately and heal it.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the wart is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, turn it over and grab the wart with tweezers, and then pull it out while pressing from both sides;
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	and if the paper is removed by the incision, it does not matter.
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	and when the wound is healed, wash with salt water and treat the area around the eye until the patient is cured.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinach is a fat that collects in the membranes above the eyelids, and this happens most often to children, and it causes them great pain, and in the mornings they have catarrh, and they cannot bear to look at sunlight because their tears flow into their eyes.
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	And because of this they lie down and sleep with their faces covered, and their eyelids become moist and puffy, and the appearance is concealed by the exinach that protrudes into the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the eye with your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the manner of the operation is for the patient to put his head on the operator's lap;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains out-pushing from each part, then put it on him;
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and press with your fingers on either side so that the out-pushing is gathered within the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	then cut in the middle of the moisture with the spatula a slit as wide as the wound that is made when opening a vein;
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and cut through the skin to the depth until you reach the out-pushing;
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	and in many cases out-pushing comes from the slit according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Pull it out then with tweezers between your fingers, turning your hand to the right and left until it is stretched;
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	and be careful not to push into the slit so that you do not touch the spatula to the eye and harm it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the wound does not open at the beginning of the incision, then increase the incision slightly until it opens.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	Then extract as we have said, then moisten bandages in vinegar and water, and place them on the wound, and use bandages to hold it in place.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who grind sesame seeds and place them on top to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the eye until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is a hot abscess in the eye, treat it with soothing poultices until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	And if a cold abscess comes to the area, apply a hot poultice until it is warm; then apply warm oil, and treat it with bandages.
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When hairs grow on paper, different from their natural state, and they are damaged, it harms them, and causes various diseases, like tears, and softening of the paper and the skin, until it becomes the cause of their destruction.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	And there are three ways to treat this:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	Either by fire cautery, or by using a medicine according to what is in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching, or by splints, according to what I will say.Et la cause de la destruction des poilz est par le feu ou par medicine de cautere, selonc ce qu’il avient en la nature de la maladie:
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	You should place the patient's head on your lap, then turn the paper over their eye to your left hand.
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	If it is converted, that is good;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	if not, then put an needle on the thread above it.
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and let him hold the margin of the paper where the hairs grow next to these hairs, and draw the thread above it all the way up to the paper, then turn it back to the razor.
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	Then he should cut under the paper, under the hair, all along the spatulum, from the large to the small.
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	Then pull out the thread and place a small piece of cotton and linen under the paper, then draw an inch-long figure on the paper in the shape of a mirtle leaf, and according to the amount that you see the paper rising, you should make it longer or shorter.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if it has a great quantity of paper according to how the paper is softened;
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	then do the whole spatula-like on the two lines you have signed, and start from the large to the small;
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	and be one of the slits close to the natural hair in the thickness of a root, then insert the needle into one of the two corners of the heart, then scrape it all;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	then assemble the two lips with a stitch of a fine woolen thread, and draw out the blood, and dry the excess of the threads above the two eyelids with any sticky thing, if you want to do this;
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	and if not, then don't worry about it, then leave the stitch and threads for three or four days;
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	then cure the wound without stitches with dry and compressing things, for the paper rises to the soudainness of the wound and its gathering, but the stitch is painful (as the ancients say), and it is work without fear;
et si a une autre maniere:	and if there is another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and you should draw the paper in the shape of a leaf of myrtle, as we have described, with three lobes evenly spaced according to the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut out what is above with small scissors evenly according to the shape which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you cannot hold the tweezers and the object is not even, then take a needle and thread and sew it into the figure:
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	And sew another thread through the large eyelet, and the second thread through the small one, and bring the threads together evenly between your fingers:
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then lift your hand evenly, and lift up all the skin above which you have sewn, as we have described, then bring together the two lips of the wound by stitching, and heal it until it is healthy:
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if an abscess comes from your incision, then soothe it with cerots and similar soothing ointments:
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	and sometimes the hairs of the paper are converted:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	if you should use that which we have said about the incision;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The cure of bones is as follows:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and you should convert the paper and insert it according to what I have said, and then make two bones by art, and two thin ligaments as long as the paper and the broadness of the spleen is;
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and cut into two parts where you hold the threads;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then assemble one and the other sutilly above what stands out from the paper of the eye, and draw out the two bones from the two formed parts;
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and let it be thus for a few days, and the skin that is stretched will die and shrivel and fall off as it drops off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it is delayed, then treat it with cautery until it is healed.
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	and when the wound is sutured and the skin raised, then the hairs will no longer prick.
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	And this is the form of the two cans that you shall make according to this figure and this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	The tools are such that you thread a thin needle with fine silk;
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	then bring the heads together and tie them subtly together, and the length of the threads should be a palm long;
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	then place in the hollow another fine thread of silk, and tie the heads of the thread;
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	then put the patient's head into the hole;
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	and it should be done under the sun so that the procedure is visible, for it is a subtle and small procedure; then push the needle all the way into the root of the hair, piercing the skin gently until you reach the natural hair;
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	then pull out the hair up to the root, and put into the socket that hair, if there are one or two or three or more;
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	then pull your hand back so that the hairs grow straight into the socket with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the socket is treated and the hair does not grow out with it, then you shall pull the socket from below to the very end of the thread that you tied to it, until the socket comes out through the hole above, and you see it through your eye.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	then you shall pull on the socket and the thread, closing your eye for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh grows over it;Et si la chasse est trop foible que tu ne puisses la traire ains se rompt le fil, si mettrais la cheville de l’un costat et la cheville de l’auter en celui auter costat qu’il soit leu, tant
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	and if the hairs are short, then accompany it with a long hair from the tail of a horse, and let it grow along with it until it is elongated, and then release it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the eye's pus
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this disease called "aleacrati" or warts comes on the eye, there are two ways in which it occurs:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	One is natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or cutting or cauterization, and by similar means.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the manner of the treatment for this is to split the wart, and separate its lips, and place in it flax threads, and let it stay until it heals.
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And one must not use in its treatment anything that dries and constricts.Et si li porriture est innatureil, si tu les esprenges a l’huile d’olives et a l’huile d’am
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do that, the disease will return worse than before;And s’el est en la paume de la main ou de la pie, si covient qu’
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but treat with softening things, such as fenugreek;
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and use rosewater or water heated and seeded with flax, and apply a poultice of softened pig fat, and treat the area with ointments made from a variety of oils, and cover it with a tent, and apply a hot compress to the area.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And in your treatment, be sure that you do not allow it to heal according to its previous shape;
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	and the treatments we have described are for this condition alone, so that it does not return to its previous shape.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease, which is beneath what is truly called "the brain", is both natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	Accidents come from wounds, incisions, cauterization, and similar things;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	and the way to treat it is to take a needle and thread it with a double strand of thread, then insert the needle into the flesh and pass it through from one side of the wound to the other, so that the thread passes through both sides of the wound;
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	then they are sewn up at the top all along the needle, and the cone is made wide at the spatulate end.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the shape of the parchment returns as it should, that is good;
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	if not, then take a razor and put it in the slit, and turn the parchment over, and make two slits along the inside of the parchment;
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	and the head of the two slits are at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and an angle is made so that when they are put together, the shape is like that of a letter which has the form «I griesche»;
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	then remove this thread, according to the amount that its sides are stretched below, from that which follows the parchment, then join the two severed parts and sew them together with a thread of wool;
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat with what we have said about softening medications and bandages until he is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the illness comes from a tear or a cut or cautery, then you must make a clean cut under the hair of the scalp, and according to what is said above:
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	then separate the two lips of the tent as I have said;
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	and the treatment should be according to the form of the disease, for it is very different in form, and the wise master doctor prepares an instrument with all his skill so that the form returns to its natural shape;
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	and the illness itself, according to what it needs in terms of treatment and instruments, in many different ways.
dou soudement de la papiere	suddenly from the scalp
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this soudure happens to adult men in such a way that the scalp above is separated from the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must stick the tip of a razor under the scalp and lift it upward;
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	and they stretch them as far as they can withstand the subtle spatulum, neither too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient cannot endure the pain of a spatulum that is too sharp or cuts the eye;
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	and your incision, by which you scrape that union, should be light, so that the membrane returns according to its natural shape;
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	and all that union is cleaned, and sometimes in the eye there is salty pus, and it is raised with fresh water and collarets;
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	then place a piece of linen between the membrane and the eye, and place over the eye wool moistened in egg white;
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	and after three days use collarets and sudoric things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the eyelid
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	You should know that the nail has two manners:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	one is nervous and resembles a hard wart, and the other is not nervous but resembles frozen white moisture; when touched with iron, it feels numb to the fingers, yet no one can feel it.the first manner is when there is a vein beneath it; the second manner is when it has no vein beneath it, but is flat like a membrane.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	and both the appearance begins towards the great tear duct, and grows little by little until it covers all the view and all the light and the movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the manner of the incision is such that the patient puts his head in the air, then he works them;
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	and lightly take the paper in your hand, then curl it with your nails as pincers of small doublet, and hold them on top;
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	then take a needle, and put on it a horse's hair, or cow's, or ox's, and strong thread;
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and double the point of the needle a little and push it into the nail, and pierce all the way through the needle, and tie the nail with thread and hold them on top, and scrape along the side of the nail which follows the tear duct to the edge of the eyelid and attach the thread to the hair just above the tear duct, then cut off the remainder at the root of the tear duct all the way to the tear gland gently and with small forces, and leave the natural skin on the tear duct so that through the incision doesn't come the accustomed flesh;
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	and sometimes the nails are affected at the nailbed only, and along the nail, as we have said;
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	then they scrape away all of the scaly skin that is the cause of this condition.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And be careful that the scaly skin does not touch and break the delicate flesh, and that the fingernail is not pierced;
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	and after making the incision, pour a little quicksilver into the wound, and apply a collar made of litharge, leaving it on until the next day;
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it as needed until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the nail is not sensitive and you cannot push in a needle, and the nailbed will not allow entry, many times this kind of nail has been cured by medicines;
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and they grow back as I have described in the section on division; and if you see it covering up again, treat the nailbed according to the illness, taking the scaly skin gently with a sharp tool according to this method:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And raise the nail gently, and if you see that it does not lessen and the pus is forced out, then distil from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litharge and red copper dust, and seal the eye until the next day.
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Then restart the other treatment according to this same method, until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then begin the work again as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the flesh around the eye damages it greatly, then suspend it at the eyelid, and scrape away a part of it but not all, so that no body of tears comes to it.
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	Then distil into the eye a red collar made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh which grows on the eyeball
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	In some men's eyes, a red vein sometimes emerges and covers the pupil and constricts it, and then retreats into the back of the eye, resembling a rose made of brass.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	and the work is such that the patient puts his head on yours, then he works them, and pulls all that flesh to hooks suitable for this, and holds it with strength;
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	then shave the first part of the flesh, and go all along shaving to the end, and be careful not to cut the eye during the operation;
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	and let the incision be from the spleen to that which we have said in the incision of the fingernail, and with small forces from which one removes the stone, as the form after this chapter demonstrates;
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	and when the incision is complete and all the flesh removed, then apply the eye of silk thread in which you distil red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines, and place over it cotton wool soaked in egg white, so that it is secured from hot abscesses;
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	and if nothing remains there, and the cold blood flows over it, and you doubt a hot abscess, then leave the eye and treat the abscess with things that soothe hot abscesses;
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do as much as is adjusted in the eye by this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	However, you should still lighten the treatment of each weak eye through the natural way;
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and of the accidental way, in the work of iron;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member can bear that work.
des voines des eulz	of veins of them
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Veins are red lines that cover the eye, they hinder vision and weaken the eye every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	So it is necessary for the first thing you look at the eye, in which way it is, and out of which there is no other disease but the evil;
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	then treat it in such a way:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	instruct the patient to put his head down, then open those veins gently according to his wisdom, and let the veins be subtle and double according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let two edges be gradual in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	then open those veins strongly, and draw out the blood hour after another, until you see those veins removed from the eye;
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	and be careful not to hurt the eye with the points of the spatulas, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very cautious in your work so that you do not miss any veins.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	And when you have finished, distill into the eye a green and red collyrium to corrupt what is remaining of the infection.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you are unable to draw out everything in that hour, then apply an ointment to the eye of things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for a few days until the pain is eased and the abscess is secured with a hot poultice, then begin again according to the method described above until it is healed.
et c’est li forme des forces:	And this is the formula of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the eye fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The physician called "Arisati" treated a fistula:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	when you have treated it with cautery and medicine of fire according to what I have said above, and it is not healed, then there is an infection in it that you must cut open over the abscess, where it should be, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see the decay and blackness, then take all the tools with which this is formed;
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	and it is called 'asparagus', and it should be made of iron into a small head, and pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And put on the location of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little bit until you know that the corruption is gone;
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and do this several times, then restore the place with drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	if the place is sewn up, and the flesh grows together, and the body of the wound is sewn up, and remains like this for 40 days, and it does not open again and no evil accident comes, then you may know that it is healed;
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	If not, there is no other remedy but to bring the fistula back to the opening of the ear according to this form:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	And it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered, he takes the forest according to this form, and the head of the iron should be three-pointed, and the shaft should be thinned down to its tip as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	Then he places it on the bone near the eardrum, and he removes his hand from the ear, then he returns to pushing the iron in until it pierces the bone, and the patient feels it through his eardrum if he keeps his hand over his ear.
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	And then it is healed with dry remedies as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens, he checks the matter in the ear.
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the output of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eyes are fully open all around and there is no disturbance or diminution, then you must ligature the patient;
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	then cleanse the eye, then apply leeches or a hot poultice without burning to suck out the humor, then place on the eye an ointment made of acacia, aloe, incense, and myrrh, and then bind it up with bandages and cloths; and if it is a child,
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	and the manner of the cloths is that you fold soft cloths in half, and double each one in four, and then place them one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye needs; and if it is a child,
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	then bind it firmly from above with a hard bandage, and reapply the leeches to suck without burning;and if there is still humor,then take a needle and pierce the eye at its upper corner,and apply the leeches again to suck out the humor.Then, place on the eye an ointment made
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	then remove the cupping glasses and leave the eye stretched day and night, and if the ligatures loosen, you must stretch it a lot.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	then remove the bandage after a day and a night, and if you see the eye healing, that's good;
se ce non;	if not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	then restart the poultice and bandages and the ligature and cupping glasses until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	from the rupture of a woven fabric
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When a disruption occurs in the woven web, then it opens up, and something like a grain of resin comes out, and it is terrible to see;
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	then, if you see it covering up, the treatment is such that you push a needle into the root of the part below up to the part above, then push another needle where there is a double thread on the eyelid;
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and have it pierced, and leave the first needle in place according to its position;
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	Then cut the thread of a double-threaded needle and tie one end around the eye, and tighten it well, then pull out the needle and place the moistened other eye on top.
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and let it be until the thread breaks with the eye, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed;
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and sometimes the wound is restrained by the eye on each side of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the eyes appear large, then pierce them with a fine spatulum which comes from the depth of the eye, and scrape away the white moisture and lower the eyes, and enter immediately;
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	then pull it out until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the corner of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease called 'alkunati' has no cure except by removing the film that gathers in the eye, resembling descending water, but it is not water;
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	and the way to perform this operation is as follows: make the patient sit on a chair that is prepared and straight, then take the head in your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the jaw coming up to your eyes.
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	then be quiet, and lower the light, and look at the patient's face as usual;
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if it does not go away, you know it is acute, and if the jaw' going down is not as we have described.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	make the patient sit between your hands, then take the spatula and gently press on the membrane above the corner of the eye with the conjunctiva and the membrane, until the jaw releases.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and when it is released, put in the eye hot water mixed with honey, or boiling water or fenugreek and honey, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the eye waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have already described the appearances of diseases in their various forms, and what is necessary to know about them.
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	act according to the instructions regarding health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	You should make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light and towards the sun, and then close his healthy eye and squeeze it firmly.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	Then place the paper on the eye with your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or with your right hand if they are on the right;
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	Then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand if they are on the right;
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Then place the tip of the instrument below the white part of the eye near the inner corner, and then push the "almagda" gently and twist your hand so that it pierces the white of the eye, feeling for the empty space;
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	and the measure of the path of the alchemy should be at the bottom of the measure of the space which is from the prunelle to the end of the darkness;
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	and it is the crown of the eye;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	if you see the bone in that paper because of the clarity of the horned tissue, then put the instrument in the place where the water is, and then express it under one path after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	if he sees the water now, let the patient see it before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After a little rest, if the water rises up the second path, put it back with the instrument, and when it is stuck in and no longer rising, gently draw out the alchemy by turning your hand a little bit at a time;
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	and then put in a little gem oil, and remove that eye from inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put by force into the eye cotton wool or linen moistened in rose oil and an abundance of egg white, and bind it with clean cloth.Si li aigue ne vout point remonier, si leve la fuer de dedans la vierne et de l’oil avec un picquet de fer ou d’oile de paume et legierement avec un puitier de fer; puis li lie avec l’oil sain.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	If the water does not want to rise again, then lift the force from within the vein and eye with an iron rod or palm oil and gently with an iron spoon; then bind it with clean cloth. We, and those who are of our time, put on ground cumin mixed with an abundance of egg white.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if  'almagda' cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some people whose eyes are too hard, then you should take the instrument called  'alberit', which has this shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And so pierce the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make the place subtle, then put in the alchemy as we have said;
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	and at the completion of the work, prepare for the patient by bringing to him a bed in a dark place where he can sleep on his back.
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	and let him abstain from all movement and eat light foods, and not move his head or to the right or left, and let him be bound according to his condition for three days.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	Then release him in that same dark house and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then remove the bandage by the seventh day.
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And you should not do this during the hour of the treatment or after an incision is made, but you should alleviate it, because the water rises rapidly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	If a hot abscess comes, release the eye before the seventh day, and use that which soothes an abscess;
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	and when it is appeased, he looses the bandage and puts a blindfold over his eyes to cover them, and then he is led into that dark room.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	Then he leaves the house little by little, and returns to his senses;
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	and know that no student should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And one came to us from the Land of Israel, who told us that in his land they make almond milk, which is sucked out by a tube, but I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read about it in ancient books;
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	and perhaps it is a new thing.Et je vis de la mesme aigue fere un pou monia, si que
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the similarities of the forms of almonds, so that those who do not know them may see them;
et soient d’arain proprement:	and they are properly of bronze:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And the heads of the needles have this same subtlety, and the hindmost are pointed in three angles.
de la char sor le neis	of the heart through the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	There are times when children are born with various deformities, and among them there are some who look like scorpions with feet.
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	and if they have a wound of flesh-colored hue, and if they have a sore of boney color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	For those who have sores and not wounds, you should make the patient sit in your hands facing the sun;
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	open his nose, and pour oil on the sores, and draw it out;
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	then hold what you can sustain with a thin, sharp spatula on one side, until you know that the sore is completely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if anything remains that cannot be scraped away, then open it with a thin, sharp instrument lightly, so that nothing is left behind;
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and if pus emerges, dry the wound as necessary;
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	and if they are malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize them until the pus is drained and all the corruption is removed; then drop honey or vinegar or wine on it.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the nose bleeds, and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healthy;
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	and if moisture does not pass through as it should, know that there is corruption in the bone above, and so the instruments will not work to cut it out:
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	therefore you must insert a piece of thick linen thread, and it must be greased with lard, and there should be between each knot the width of a finger or less;
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	and place one end of the thread in the patient's mouth at the tip of his tongue, and pull it through until it comes out the nose;
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	and many children do this at school, and it is an easy thing for anyone who wants to do it;
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	then hold the head that comes from the nose in one hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth in the other hand, and pull them one after the other while being careful like those who are on a thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this until you know that the night has corrupted the flesh. Then pull out the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment before putting it back in the nose as before.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the flesh;
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	and then put in the nose a plug of cotton for several days until it is healed. If medicine is needed to dry it out, then use it.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	And this is the shape of the instrument for purging the head, through which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And it can be of silver or bronze, resembling an open lamp, like a candle, and lead them likewise;
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	and if you see fit, make a closed candle, and fill the instrument with medicine to cleanse the head;
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	and have someone hold the head when heating the oil or any other liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the heart through the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times a disease arises in the brain called "tuberculosis", which grows and becomes large, until it is visible to the eye;
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	and for this reason you must open it at the beginning, and cut out all that is rotten, then place on it the cautery or burning medicine;
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	and if one delays in opening it until it has grown large, then be careful that it is not hard, a bad colour, and lacking in feeling:
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	nor touch it with iron for it is an encrusted abscess, for when one opens it, great harm comes to the patient;
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	and if the abscess is from a soft touch, not a flowing colour, and you see that it can be completely covered, then empty the patient and cover it without fear, and treat the area with dry and constricting things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when a solution of continuation comes in one of these upper cartilage, it benefits little, unless in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	Therefore, whenever this happens to someone, look to see if the wound is fresh and bleeding;
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then close the two lips with a stitch, then treat it until it heals;
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	and if the lips are separated on both sides, then you should cut all around their edges until they heal, then bring the two lips together with a stitch, and constrict them, and apply powdered dragon's blood over powdered incense;
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put a piece of strong plaster or other adhesive plaster over the powders, and leave it until it comes off by itself, then treat it with ointment until it heals.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The manner of sewing is to prepare a solution:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	either with needles, as we have said in the suturing of the belly;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or with thread, as I have already made known to you.
des apostemes des levres	of lip abscesses
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	Within the lips there occur hard abscesses, resembling peas, both smaller and larger;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	therefore you should turn up the lips, and cut on each nodule, and take it with tweezers and scrape in each part;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	then apply vitriol powder to the wound after cutting, until the blood stops flowing;
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then leave it with honey, and clean the area of dried matter until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of gum swelling
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Often there grow on the gums a pustule that the old call 'albus';
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	you should grip it with tweezers and scrape at its root, and let the pus or blood flow out;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	then place on the site vitriol powder, or other restraining and drying powders;
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	and if the wound reopens after the incision, and this often happens, then close it again a second time, cauterizing it;
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	if it does not reopen after cauterization;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	and these are the forms of the fistulas to treat.
des sordens	from filth
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Sometimes they form at the root of teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, which are ugly and rough;
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	and sometimes the teeth turn black and green and rot, as the corruption spreads to the gums, and the teeth stink;
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	you should make the patient hold his head in your hands, and press on the teeth or gums where they are visible, until nothing remains;
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	and so you should do with blackness and greenness, and yellowing and other stains, until they are removed;ensí si tu vois que li dent est noir dedens et citrin, et la gencive citrine, et li dent puant et la gencive puant, tant qu’il n’i demore puanteur ne
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	and if one removes what is at its base, that is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	if not, then repeat it again the next day and the third day, until you have removed everything.
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	and know that teeth have need of various instruments for removal, according to what the work shows them, because the forceps with which one removes the teeth are of a different shape from those used to remove things between the teeth.
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	And these shapes and others should be prepared for you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	It is necessary when you cure a tooth of its pain that you delay pulling it as long as you can, because it must not be done quickly.Et si li dent est en tel leu de sa dolor que on ne peut le traire, et qu’il soit de si grant dolor qu’on ne doit pas le
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	Because it is a very high substance until one has no excuse to pull it out.Et si li dent est en tel leu de sa dolor que on ne peut le traire, et qu’il soit de si grant dolor qu’on ne doit pas le raier, car c’est une substance
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore, when the patient is forced to pull, you must be certain of the tooth socket.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the pain deceives the patient, and he believes it is in a sound tooth, and has the good tooth pulled;
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	and yet the pain does not leave him thereby, as long as the bad tooth remains, for we have already tried this with those healers;
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	and when you are quite certain of the tooth that is aching, then you must scrape all around it with a spatulum and press hard to push back the gum on all sides;
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	then seize it with your fingers or with fine tongs at the gum line and wiggle it gently until it is well loosened, then grip it firmly with the tongs;
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and have the patient's head between your knees, and hold it steady so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	Then pull out the tooth carefully without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of those instruments and insert it into each side gently, and move it as you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if the tooth is broken and has a hole in it, then you must fill it with wax where the hole is;
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and if he tightens it subtly with tweezers so that it does not break when being tightened;
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	and one must work around the gum very gently to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be careful that you do not break it, and leave a part of it behind, and cause greater pain to the patient through the maliciousness of the root.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And beware of doing as the ignorant surgeons do, who in their haste and arrogance sometimes break the jaw, and don't listen to what we have instructed.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but sometimes cause great sickness by hurting the roots or breaking the jaw, as we have often seen.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	and when the tooth is loose, wash the gum with wine or garlic and salt;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, then apply crushed vitriol to the site;
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	and if that doesn't work, then cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The instruments for pulling teeth should have long, thin points and wide handles so that they do not bend when you pull the tooth;
et ce sont les formes:	and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be made of thick metal so that they do not bend when pulling, and they should be well-made iron, and they should be toothed to grip the roots.
de la racine des dens	of the tooth roots
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root remains in its place, you should apply wet cotton to the area for one or two days until the skin softens, and then use tweezers called "algefri" that make the shoulder look like a bird's beak.
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	They should be made inside as sharp as a file, and this is the shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tweezers, you must uncover the skin all around the root, and insert the instrument called "althali", that is, a spatula, whose shape is as follows:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	It should be sturdy and thick so that it does not break, and if the root comes out through it, that' is good.
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	If not, use all your tools, and the forms come afterwards as follows:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And one can also use this instrument with .ij. fingers, whose shape is as follows:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools which are in front of the reason for the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large tweezers, whose shape is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And let this tool be strong so that it does not break, and know that there are many tools for teeth.
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	There are also other tools which are not counted.
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And the wise master finds his own tools according to what his experience and the illness show him, for there are many types of illnesses that the ancients did not teach tools for due to their diversity; if he does not break through the bone or other bones but pierces through, then he should seek the tools that are needed as I have told you, and aid himself with gestures.
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And they must be thick and well-fitting to hold the bone, so that it does not slip, but can be held and removed;
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	then restore the place with appropriate medicine, and if there is swelling in the bone, and it is small, then treat it with this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When a tooth appears not according to nature, and its shape is ugly, especially in virgin women, you must know whether the tooth is new after teething, and is not in the right place, and cannot be filed or ground down:
adonques lou raie;	then pull it out;
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	and if there is an abscess with the tooth, take this instrument, of which the shape is like a small beak, and made of iron sharpened at its tip;
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And tap it gently day by day because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others. And if it is apparent that it can be ground down, then grind it with a file like this, in the shape shown:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	it is also like a file, with which needles are made;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and in lime gently pick at the tooth a little bit by bit, so that it does not move until it comes out;
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	then smooth it at the end with no razor, and if the tooth is too sharp and it cuts the tongue, then file down the roughness until it is even so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth is loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the front teeth are loose from either a blow or falling, and the patient cannot bite down on what they eat without it coming out, and you have tried restraining medicines without success,
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	then they should be restrained with a gold wire, for silver wire turns green and rots away, but gold never moves.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	The wire should be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the amount of space between the teeth;
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	and if you see the teeth leaning to one side, take a thread and tie it double between two healthy teeth, then place the head between the loose teeth, whether there is one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side;
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	then start the binding again from where you began, and stretch your hand gently and firmly until it does not move;
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	and tie it at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then cut the thread with pliers and gather it together, then tie it between the healthy teeth so that it does not irritate the tongue;
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	then leave it as tightly as possible for as long as it can stay in place, and if it comes undone or the thread breaks, tie it with another thread;
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	it will stay in place and serve its purpose for as long as needed, and this is the shape of the teeth and how they lean to one side, as you can see;
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when a tooth falls out, if one puts it back in its place, bit by bit, as we have said;
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and no one who is not wise and experienced should meddle with it, and sometimes a tooth is made from cow bone, and it is put in the place where there is a gap, and it is held steady as we have said, and it remains and functions for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	cut off the hair of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Sometimes this type of growth comes from under the tongue, where nature creates it;
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or as a result of an injury.
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the treatment is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and put his head in your lap, and lift up his tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	then grab the nerve under the tongue, as wide as the tongue is dislocated from its socket, and if there is swelling or a lump, which is due to an injury, then push in with the fingernail and grab it under the tongue;
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and be careful that the split is not too deep, because of the artery underneath.
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	And when you have finished, raise the area with rose water and parsley, or cold water, then put underneath the tongue a tent made of linen;
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	and treat the patient every night so that the wound does not close over.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if there is bleeding, put ground glass onto the area;
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	and if the blood is flowing, cauterize it with a slow-acting cautery which is good for this purpose.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	Then treat it again and again until it is healed;
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	and if you see it is black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is gangrene.
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	And if it is inclined to white pus and there is moisture, pierce it with an éléphant's tusk, and drain it from one side and the other;
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	and if their blood flows onto your work, then place powdered vitriol on it until it is stained, then return to your work until you have finished everything.
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then lift the ax and the saw, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	from abscesses in the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	Sometimes, bumps called "godath" (possibly referring to a type of ulcer) appear in the throat, and they are properly called "almonds." When you treat them as described in the previous section and they do not heal, then be cautious:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	if it is a hard abscess of a small size and light color, do not touch it with iron.Si li corps est de la figure d’une bete fendee, et li corps est mort, il ne le puet demorer; mais si li
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if the body is shaped like a split animal, and the body is dead, it cannot survive. But if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron due to blood flow;Car il se doit curer en autre manier que li corps soit san: il doit curer en le
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	but let it grow until it is long, and then you will cut it off, or it will break on its own.
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if they are of a white color and the roots are thin, then prepare the instrument for cauterizing, but first examine whether the abscesses have calmed down and become quiet.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then let the patient sit facing the sun, and his head in your lap, and open his mouth and hold the instrument between his teeth, and press his tongue down on it so that the tip of the instrument is positioned correctly.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	It should be made of silver or thin brass like a small knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	When you have pressed the tongue against the tip of the instrument and seen the abscess, grab it with forceps and pull it out, as far as you can.
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	and bring some cloth with you, then the cup to the instrument, from which is the shape, that looks like some strength;
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	the ends are bent and one towards the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	If you do not have this instrument available, use tweezers, which should be shaped like a hook:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And they are serrated on one side and smooth on the other;
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and when you have cupped one of the testicles, then cup the other in the same way, and after the incision gargle the patient with warm water, and water and garlic, and if there is bleeding, then gargle the patient with water, or pomegranate peels are cooked, or myrrh, and similar things, until the blood is stanched;
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then he heals until it is healed;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	and sometimes other abscesses grow in the throat besides the two testicles, so cup them then as the two testicles are cupped.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman of an abscess which was inside her throat, that is to say, a small abscess.
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	and had almost closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passageway which was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if it continued for one or two more days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess had become so swollen that it had pushed up two warts from the back of her throat.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I therefore acted quickly, and inserted a hook into the abscess, then pulled it outwards, and extracted a large amount of pus;
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	then I made an incision in the other nostril, and cleared her throat and pressed on her tongue;
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	afterwards, I inserted a hook into the abscesses, and scooped out some of it, and only a little blood came out;
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	and thus the passageway of the throat was cleared for the woman, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I continued to lance this abscess for a long time;
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	and the abscesses grew back again, filling the space that I had emptied, until it became very large;
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	so I lanced and cauterized it within the throat:
ensi demora sens croistre;	thus it stopped growing;
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	and I left that area, and may God do with him what he will after I am gone.
de l’uve	of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When the eye descends to the pupil, and it is swollen and distant, it is called "perpendicular";
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	and if it is below it is large and round, it is called  "eye".;
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is cut as we have said in the division, and the cautery does not help, and you see that the abscess has subsided and it is subtle, then you must scoop it out;
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	and that which is round and gathered together and not distant;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and it is blood red or fawn colored or black, then you should avoid incising it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have described, from its whiteness and length, you should have the patient sit facing the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument which we mentioned earlier:
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	then insert the needle into the eye, and draw it out from underneath, and cut off the tip of one of the two instruments that I mentioned for the incision on the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And you should not cut deeper than the excess which is beyond the natural limit;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	for if you cut deeper, it harms the voice and speech;
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and after the incision, use what we said about the incision on the two almonds, and treat it until it heals.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of covering, then you should use an incision to treat his fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the method of cautery is for acute fever.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And let the patient place his head in your lap, and then press his tongue against the instrument we mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and mix it with hot water, so that it is neither too thick nor too clear.
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and use the application of this instrument, whose shape is described as follows:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	At the end of the shaft there is a cup or bowl in which the medicine is placed, like the bowl of a spoon, and with the instrument one applies all the medicine to the eye;
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	and the patient should lie on his side, so that the saliva and mucus run out of his mouth from the medicine, so that it does not descend into the throat and lungs;
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	then hold your hand over the medicine and press it onto the eye for about half an hour, until you see it becoming soft and the stinging of the medicine subsiding;
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	and if you see [it], take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and wet the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument all the way into the cotton on the cane above, so that the cotton sticks to the ulcer;
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	and do this often, until the cautery is complete, then leave it to dry and fall off after 4 or 5 days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you need to renew the cautery with medicine, do so, and after the cautery is complete, wash around the ulcer with cotton dipped in butter, and cleanse what is around the medicine;
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then rinse with cold water, and treat with gargles until it heals.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This treatment is safer than incision or cautery;
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	If it is treated by fumigation according to this method, take calamintha and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and avens and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in a pot, and put garlic in it, and let it boil;
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	and the pots are well glued with strong earth, and inside the pot there is a chewed instrument according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	It can be made of silver or bronze, and one end is placed in the mouth of the patient so that the vapors rise into the eye through the canal until the eye is numbed.
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	Afterwards, he repeats this often until the eye dries out. Be careful not to do this at the beginning of a hot abscess, for many things can happen then.
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and not to do this except during the decline of a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not present, take a straw and put an egg yolk inside it so that the mouth of the patient is not too hot;
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	for the straw will not let the vapor harm the mouth, and this is a good and healthy treatment together.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Many times an object gets stuck in the throat, such as a fish bone or some other thing.
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	If you can see something in the throat, then press the tongue against it with your instrument under the light of the sun until you feel movement;
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	and if something is stuck in the throat and cannot be removed, then you should make the patient vomit until the meat is cooked in the stomach;
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	by chance the object may come out through vomiting;s’il ne peut muer la chose tant qu’il soit cuite en l’estomac,
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	If the object cannot be moved while it is still in the stomach, or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of rope, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread;et li faice boire vin et aiglent;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and give him wine and vinegar to drink; and attach a string to the sponge and then swallow it;Et se li morcelz de pain sont trop gros, li faice les rem
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when it comes to the surface, then it will bleed, and then you will pull it out;
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come out as we have said, then take an instrument of lead according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And the instrument should be curved at its tip so that it can more easily enter the throat, and the head should be lifted up high;
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, or he will choke, nor push the bone inside;
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	and it is better that the patient himself inserts the instrument, so that he can feel where the object is;
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	if he swallows it, then he should pull it out with the instrument evenly, until it is out.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the saliva of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	Sometimes the blood is drawn, as I have said in the division, through medical treatments;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	and if this does not help, then look at the back of the throat towards the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument that I have told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the blood, draw it out with a small hook, or with fine tweezers suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, take a pointed stick, and insert it into the throat of the ill person; then heat the tip of the stick with hot iron, and do this frequently.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient has a fever all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	then take a full glass of cold water, open your mouth and pour it in without swallowing, moving the water around with your hand frequently.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	and as soon as the blood feels the water, it will clot.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if it does not clot as we have said, then smoke out the patient with assafetida using the instrument I mentioned for smoking out the throat.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	Do this many times, because it will clot without bleeding.Et s’il se trouve en la bouche ou a la gorge lou sang qu’il ne peut engluitir,
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the method of smoking is that you heat a pot with burning charcoal until it has a layer of ash, and in this ash is the tip of the instrument;
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	then you shall apply the smoke, and the patient place the end of the cane in his mouth, and close his mouth so that the smoke does not escape but reaches the blood vessels.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	and the blood vessels will burst now, and if they do not, then resume the smoke treatment many times;
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	and let the patient endure thirst, and eat salted and bitter things, and drink no water;
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	and then it will be necessary for her to go out by this method of treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the shape of the instrument used to treat the blood vessels is, when one can see it, like bent tongs in order to enter the throat;
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	and has the appearance of a surgeon's forceps, and it has roughness from liming, so that what it grasps, it cannot let go;
et vez ci la forme:	and see here the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	There are many kinds of abscesses, according to what recollections come here after from both this book and others, and they differ in penetration and size:
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	and they are of two types, the first of which is in its appearance the same, and due to what it holds in moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second kind is due to the locations where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundations, and the abscesses of fleshy places are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And one must not pierce abscesses until the boil is mature according to its completion;
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	and there are some that one must pierce when they have become crusty, and do not die according to their completion, such as abscesses that are near joints.Et sont divers les apostemes, car il en ont de lor taille et lor perforation;
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near joints, and one lets it be so long that it is pus around, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb.Et si il le percierent, et il se curast adés, si est cause de grant mal a celui qui a la jointure, car il ne puet remuer li meisme membre tant qu’il vult.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	Abscesses are diverse, for they have different sizes and penetrations. The abscess may be near the principal member, and if you delay the penetration until it is mature, it will harm the principal member;
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	or if it is near the foundation, one must pierce it so that it dies.
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	and one must not pierce an abscess without digestion being complete, except for the one that is near the foundation, which should be allowed to drain freely inside, and a fistula will result.
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and it cannot heal in a short time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And one must know the hour of the piercing of the abscess which is dead according to completion, and it is when the pain is eased, and the lessening of fever, and the decrease in swelling and redness, and the cooling and hardening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	and one must pierce in the highest part of the abscess, and where it appears softest;
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and the piercing must be done deeply into the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints, near nerves, and throughout all places where there is no fold.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	For those who bend, according to the affected member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to let the piercing wait until it is confirmed with digestion complete, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce it before this, then the body is stretched out from its venom, and it is filled with much filth.
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and perhaps harden his lips and his depths.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is an abscess which has been pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And you should treat it with small abscesses, small holes;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in large abscesses, large holes, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess;
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if there are such abscesses where one must cut into the brain, and cover;
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	when it has become as soft as a grape, and is dead, then one should do as one does with blisters:
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	and some are split into three angles, and some are covered as the fuel of myrrh, as with abscesses of the bones;
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and some where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those who have no head, as with a superficial abscess, you must pierce it directly.
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	And when the abscess is large and has formed a great boil, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in one hour, but only a portion of it.
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	Then pack the abscess until the next day, then draw out some more the following day;
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	Do this repeatedly, a little at a time, until all the pus has been released.
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Especially if the patient is weak, or a woman carrying a child, a small child, or an elderly person.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For sometimes an experienced surgeon jumps with the release of gas from the belly, which may kill the patient, and you would not know it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Therefore, be very cautious with this chapter. After you have pierced the abscess, wash the wound and check if the wound of the abscess is small;
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	and if it's a clean cut, apply bandages made of linen or old cotton;
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	and if it is a large abscess with many openings, you should put a tent in each opening so that they come together.
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	and if you have cut into the abscess and cut around it, then you should fill it with old cotton or a lining of linen without moisture, and ligate it up to the third day.
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then remove the bone and treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs in your work, bring cold water and vinegar, and moisten the cloth, and place it over the bleeding area many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the blood flow continues, and there is administration of medicine and treatment, and the powders I have described earlier in this book, and it occurs in winter, and the abscess is very nervous, then you should put wet tents and clothes soaked in hot wine and oil on top.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	and if it is in the summer, and the area is fleshy, then you should put wet clothes soaked in water and oil or cold wine and oil on top for up to a third of a day, as we have said.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then open the abscess, clean and treat it as necessary until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And this is what one should generally understand about the treatment of abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	I have told you how to proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and now listen to the chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	From the neck come small abscesses, which are common in people who work in wool, like the pimples on a goat's udder; there are many variations of these.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are some that are fatty and others that contain pus and moisture;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	and there are some which are hard and stone-like in texture, and they do not cause doubt if the artery does not oppose them.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the operations of the waist are such that you should test all instruments called "dislocators", from which the forms come later, what they contain.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, they will push it out from above the length.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is evacuated, one should scorch it without leaving anything behind that holds the moisture, for it will return as soon as something is left behind.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	Then plunge cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is available;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	if not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound and let it sit until the next day.
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	and those who are delayed by night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then resume the cotton, as before, on the second and third days, until you know that it no longer remains overnight;
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the wound with ointment appropriately, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscess contains pus, then open it according to this method, from the long side;
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	and cut your fingernails, and remove all scabs, and put all your efforts into milking the wound where it lies under the skin;
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	and if the artery opposes you, then do what I told you after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also treat an abscess if it is piercing, and cutting and treating as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the cut on the piercing abscess and moistness is lighter, because they are full of blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And in some of these abscesses, if there is no moisture, and among them was one that I opened on the head of an old woman;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and I found the abscess like a hard stone, rough and white, and could not be broken;
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if one were to cut them, they would bleed just as much as a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other abscesses that come on the head or neck, as opposed to those which come on the heads of children and at the roots of ears, the opening should be left open in the most dependent part to allow pus to drain out.
et les cure si com il covient.	and treat them as appropriate.
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times abscesses occur on the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin area, and sometimes they come elsewhere in the body, and they are large, and some are joined together.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each scrofula is properly within its coat, like the nodule and abscess of the neck, as we have said;
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and there are many similarities among them.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and others that are stubborn and do not want to heal.And li chiés des enfans si adont qu’il ont scrophule dedens le col, ou dedens la teste, ou dedens les oreilles, ou dedens les costes, et il n’i a pas de scrophule qui ne contienent moistor et sanguine.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	Therefore, if you see one of good disposition to touch, and resembling the color of the body, and soft in each part and not hard on the nerves of the neck or artery or channel, and not deep;
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	you should cut it from above and scrape off the skin of each part, and if you have need, cut the two lips of the ulcer at the edges, as we have said about abscesses on the neck;
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	and pull it little by little, being careful not to touch the nerve or the vein, and do not use the spatula or forceps, so that the hand does not slip, and do not look too far ahead, so that you do not cover what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you touch the vein or artery and it will not let you work, put into the wound powdered vitriol, or any powder that stops bleeding, and bind the wound.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	and leave it until the abscess is relieved and the wound is softened and begins to suppurate.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the bleeding has stopped, return to your work, until you have finished it.
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	Then examine with your finger if there are any small scrofulae remaining; cut them out and clean them.Et si tu copes a la voinne ou artere, et ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, you should not cut that scrofula at its root, but ligature it with a strong double thread and let it drop down from it without harm.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	Then employ the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you pick the entire scab, you should bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now, so that no superfluity remains due to the size of the scab.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	you should attend to picking at its root, and pulling it out, and sewing it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those scrofula that have suppuration, pierce where it appears to be flowing;
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	And piercing it thus as the one before mentioned, depending on it, then treat it with tenting with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption;
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the wound is well cleaned, then cure it with ointment bandaging, until it is healed.Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double
de squinance	of scrofula
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancients said and spoke about the incision of the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	But I have never seen anyone in our land who does this, and it is their written word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those with a squint, the flap of skin in the throat called the "epiglottis" must be cut away;
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	and this is not helped by that, because all the veins and the pus from the malady are in those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the armpits.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the channel of the lungs, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the loss that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, we should cut it under the third or fourth rib, a small slit across, between the two circles, or according to the quantity of the slit in the soft palate; not in the cartilage;
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and those places are suitable for the cut of the epiglottis where there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long from there.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the master is fearful, then he should stretch the skin of the throat all the way to the Adam's apple, then split the chest until it reaches the backbone.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	and avoid blood vessels, if you see any, and then cut through the windpipe, as we have said;
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the flow of blood from the wound in the backbone, and by the lack of voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour has passed at which one doubts about strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound in the chest, and stitch it up completely without the cartilage;
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then administer remedies that promote flesh growth, until it is healed.And if there is any sign of gangrene in the wounded man, cut off all the dead tissue with a sharp knife and apply an ointment
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim says that one should not do this until the throat is completely healed, and the patient is judged dead, and the lack of breath.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Therefore, cut through the epiglottis so that the patient cannot choke, and he will breathe through the wound, and thus be saved from death;
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	and therefore the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease had passed, and it passed in three or four days. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and treat it, until it was healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a lady take a knife and stab herself in the throat, cutting some of the windpipe;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called to heal her, and found her as good as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound and found that the blood had not come out through the throat or windpipe but instead was escaping through the wound itself.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, sewed up the wound, and treated it until it healed;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and the lady had no more than a hoarseness in her voice, and she returned to her senses afterwards;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	therefore I say that one should have no fear of cutting into the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This hernia is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a large hernia in the color of ochre, and it is very common in women.
et est selonc II manieres:	And there are two ways of treating it:
naturez, et accidens;	Natural and accidental;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Or natural without cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidental ones are in two ways, one which is similar to fat and the other like an abscess that comes from an artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	And there is fear in it, and one should not operate with force unless the hernia is small; you should test and probe throughout the whole opening:
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	If you find it as soft as fat and there is no vein, then treat it like an abscess and cut all around its head if there is nothing there. But if:
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	You probe well and treat the abscess as it should be, until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways to do this, and I will describe all their appearances.
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And now I must explain the difference between a cut and a dislocation.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that a dislocation is when there is a constant fever until the swelling has passed and the wound has healed:
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	then the fever and heat abate.Et la fievre et le chalor reposiez, si comence li porriture, qui
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With a cut, there is no fever or heat or pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sac and is the color of the body's flesh. It starts like a pimple and becomes swollen:et si li porriture ne voudra point acomplir, si la fievre et le chalor ne ceient point, et li porriture ne creissez point;
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and if the swelling won't go down and the fever and heat don't abate, and the pus doesn't increase in size, then they are of two types: dry or moist, and their colors vary as I have described.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to the treatment of the nose, you should first test and examine it with an instrument called an "introducer", according to what its shape comes from in the following chapter.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of inquiring into abscesses on the brain is to squeeze the most moist place that you find in the abscess, and gradually move your fingers, until you feel that the instrument has penetrated the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then pull out the instrument, and be careful not to let anything slip out.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the pus flows easily, whatever its color, treat it as I have said for other abscesses.
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And if after the instrument no pus comes out, know that it is hard, so treat it in the shape of a cross, and grab it with tweezers, and gently scrape each side and guard the membrane where it lies so that you draw it out healthy with the brain.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot draw it out healthy, then pull it in pieces so that nothing remains.Et est-il grant danger que li chiés de l’ajutoire soit desaloiez, et il ne peuit demorer en son leu; et il est grant dolor al
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if he does not move anything, then it returns to him many times.
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if he stays a little while and the wound does not trouble him, then apply some corrosive powders to the wound, press on it, and put hot poultices on it; treat the wound with other treatments until it is healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if the wound is large, then cut the two lips of the wound and treat it with what heals flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	and if the bleeding vein is contrary to you or another, then hurry and apply powdered vitriol to the spot and leave it there for two or three days until the wound scabs over and the bleeding stops;
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	then return to binding what has been left open.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	Here are the forms of instruments for dislocation, and there are three types:
grans et moien et petit;	large, medium, and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and there are three types of warts which are called "albaret", and one type is called "breb", and there are three varieties:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	large, medium, and small, in order to surround the abscesses of fistulas;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are like the needles used to sew witches, made of brass, iron, or silver, and the yellow-tinted ones are the most effective, proven to be so, for surrounding the growths of fistulas;
et sont de III manieres:	and there are three types:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the opening of the fistula.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The shapes of the knives are very varied, as you can see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	large, medium, and small;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and there are knives with two curves of three types as well;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and if [it is] the elbow which has three curves, and [is] also in three ways;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and if [it is] the elbow which has two curves, and [the] elbow of one curve only, and  [is] in three ways;
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The heads of these knives are cutting tools, and there are some which do not cut except from one side, so that we do not cut the vein or nerve;
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and these probes are placed in handles, so that the patient does not hurt themselves when opening abscesses;
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three types:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	large, small and medium, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and we do not use them except in fleshy places, such as legs and arms, and breasts, and armpits, and similar places;
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and sometimes another small instrument is made, resembling the slices of a fig, according to this shape, with which one stanches blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is sometimes placed in the place that heals by filling the veins and arteries, and sometimes they are filled according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell up when they become corrupt, so that they look like women's breasts;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, should apply the ointment described in this chapter from line b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with an ointment made from pitch, then stitch together the two lips of the wound, and let it heal.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	And if the breast sags down, and becomes soft due to its size just like it happens to women, then they should make two cuts above it, like two similar incisions;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	and the two cuts should meet at the bottom, so that the larger cut contains the smaller one according to this shape from line b to g;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then scorches the skin between the two lips, and removes the fat, and applies what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary for the treatment, until he is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if he is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient will not rest, or due to bleeding, you should fill the wound with wet cotton soaked in corrosive ointment;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and let it remain until it dissolves the remainder and the fat, then treat it until he is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from under the armpits are like hard scrofula and they have nodules, and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who retain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line b to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the content of the abscess is drained, then fill the wound with clean cotton, and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton and dress it with suitable ointment until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are like scrofula, then treat them as we have said for fissures of scrofula, and if the wound is closed, then administer cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When an artery is severed, and the skin on top is sutured, it often results in abscesses, and likewise, the vein becomes swollen and abscessed;
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one knows it is due to an artery, then the abscesses are long and deep;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	and when you feel it with your fingers, you will feel the dislocation;
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when it is in the vein, there is a visible swelling;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is foolish to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the armpits and in the groin, neck, and many other places, and is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore, one should avoid cauterizing with iron, and the one who is on top should also be avoided, and in the one who has inflammation of an artery that opens above the skin of the neck;
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then operate with a knife, and cut the artery from the threads well, so that it is exposed;et puis fent un trou au chief de la pize, si grand com ele soit;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	then make a hole in the head of the stone, as large as it is; then put an awl under it, and pierce it through to the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two places, according to how I instructed you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;et si c’est une pize que ne se puet aler, et ele est trop grosse, covient le fendre, et aler l’artere qui soit dedenz, et la tyier;
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	then point the location between the two strings of an introducer so that the pus flows out and the abscess is drained.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then apply the treatment that dries up pus, until the wound drains;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat with ointment appropriate for this, until it is healed;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	and if the abscess is due to the size of the wound, you should dye your hand with something from the abscess all over the skin, then insert a needle under the area you're holding, and thread a double length of string through it, so that you can pull it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	then tie off the abscess, as I've told you, tying one end of the string to each shoulder;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	and if you're worried the string might slip out, insert another needle through the entire length of the string under the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tie the strings in four places;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then scrape the abscess until the excess fluid drains out, then scrape off the excess from the wound and leave what is stuck to it.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then place a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil over the wound, then apply poultices and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, as abscesses come in the artery and vein, they also come in the nerves when they are injured, or from too great exertion, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	This happens most often at the shoulders and in all joints where there is an abscess, and its color resembles that of the body, and it has various appearances without pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when you press it firmly, it hurts, and it is not deep in the body but under the skin;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	and it cannot move in any direction, neither forward nor backward, nor downward nor upward, and that which is in joints should not be cauterized with iron:
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	for there may be contraction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and that which is on the head or forehead, use the spiderwort plant.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and squeeze it at its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, they suspend it with a hook, and cut it open, then remove the bone and sew up the wound until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	of large, hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	Sometimes it occurs in bellies and nowhere else, and is a disease called "mushroom" due to its resemblance to mushrooms, with thin roots and thick stems;
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	and there are both small and very large ones;
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw one man who had two in his belly that looked more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had thin roots, and were slightly cracked, and moisture ran out of them.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I cut them open and found one weighing 18 ounces and the other 6 ounces, and the procedure for incising is to look at the wound if it is moist, and the color of the joint is white and moist with thin roots;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	if the blade of the spatule is wide, and have the fire cautery ready in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For in cutting there are often excessive bleedings of blood, and if it bleeds profusely, then hasten to the cautery.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision with the knife, take a well-prepared thread, tie it around the tendon as we have said, and leave it for two days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	and then release it, and keep tightening the thread until the tendon is cut without pain;
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	and if the roots are large, there is fear of cutting near the belly as well, but you can cut half of it, then cauterize it so that it does not grow back.
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then treat the wound and be careful not to cut the skin which is of a bluish color and poor in feeling and of milky appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is a deep abscess, and I will come to the treatment of ulcers next.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil has burst
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of a hernia comes from cauterization of a wound or from a fissure in the syphilis, and it is on the abdomen and some of the bowels, as it happens in other routings, or from blood flowing from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from flatulence;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is from the syphilis routing and from the bowel output, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a minor thing without pain, and it opens with various outputs.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is from the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it with their fingers, it pops out, and then returns in, and sometimes it is dried up, and increases a lot at the entrance of the bath and through hard work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it is due to moisture, it is a minor thing, and it opens well when you press it with your hand, and it does not constrict at all;Et se li bouez sont desaloiez de lor lieu, et li chiés adoun desaloiez, si convient que tu les remettes a lor
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if the bowels are dislocated from their place, and the head is also dislocated, then you must reset them to their place;and if it is due to blood, then the large and hard abscesses open according to a certain quantity;Et se c’est par ventositeit, si convient que tu
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is due to windiness, then it is soft in the touch, and the works are such that you look to see whether the appearance is from the blood of the artery, or the vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you are to leave the wound untreated, then:
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding both the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is from the intestines or the belly, then it is necessary that you command the patient to tighten his armpit, and be stretched out straight, then sign all around the pit;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then command him to lie down soon between your hands, then go around the place that you have signed all over the spatumile, then put half of the abscess at the top to all the great hook;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then tie it around with a strong thread, or a strong silk rope firmly, and let the navel be absolved;
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then work half of the stretched abscess on the string, and put in your index finger, and seek the intestine;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it caught in the bowel, loosen it and push the intestine back into the abdomen.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find the bowels blocked, grab them at the anus, and cut off the excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the arteries are contrary to you, or the vein, go around gently, then return to your work and take two needles, and thread two strong threads, and thread the two needles through what you have done in a cross shape that you are piercing.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then stretch the abscess in four places on the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave it so that it may drain, and push out the dead flesh by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	Or cut it when it is subtle and drainage, then clean it as necessary, and bandage the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And extract the blood or moisture which you find, then clean the area as it should be, and close the wound.
dou chancre	for sores
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have discussed in the previous section the appearance of sores, and how one should treat them with medication, and how one must avoid using an iron cautery;
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	and we will now discuss sores that appear on the testicles, and the great caution one must take in treating them, according to the ancients. When sores appear on places where they can be scratched, like on the breasts, thighs, and similar areas, and when they are in their initial stage, they should all be removed.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	But when they become large and old, one must not approach them, for I have never seen anyone healed from them.And if sores appear on the head or face, one should use a medicine to remove them, and if they are deep, one should fill them with white lead and wax, and cover them until they heal.If there is a
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	I have never seen anyone heal from this.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And the operation, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you sometimes cleanse the patient of black bile.
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	Then have him bleed if he shows signs of fullness, then ease the pain in the affected area to perform the operation.
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	Then inspect his genitals and anus, and the head from all sides, leaving nothing untouched;
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and let the blood flow out freely, and squeeze the area with your hand or something else, and if the blood flow is contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it until the bleeding stops.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat him again until he is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have already described the types of dropsy, how the accumulation of fluid occurs, and the signs of each type, as well as the treatment through medicine and surgery.
si est eclites soulement;	if it is only scalded;
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one must not touch with iron in these two cases:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	that is to say, tympany and ipohondria, for they are deadly things;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	therefore when you treat this appearance of dropsy which is called 'scalded' with medicines, and the treatment does not help, look to see if the patient is weak, or if he has another illness than dropsy, such as thirst and stomachache, and similar things;
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	do not touch with iron, for there is doubt in it;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	and if you see the patient is very strong, and he has no other illness but dropsy alone, and he is not too young or too old, then you must work thus:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	let the patient lie on his back in your arms, and press his stomach upwards by pushing the water to the lowest part of his feet; then take the spatiumile with thorns according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let there be two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	with a point, and yet not so sharp that it can reach the intestines when thrust in, nor cause bleeding.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	then examine whether the dropsy is localized towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	if you should cut into the buttock three fingers deep directly under the hip bone;
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then your cut should be at the left side of the buttock three fingers deep;
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	and if it's due to kidney disease, then it should be on the right side, and the patient must not lie on the cut so that the excess fluids do not flow into that weak area;
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	then pierce through the skin with your instrument, and insert it, and lift your hand to all the spatumile between the skin and the syfac as much as an inch or so deep;
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	then pierce the syphilis until the sputum comes to the surface, and that is the source of the pus, then pull it out, and insert this instrument from which comes the shape:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it is similar to a thin silver rod, and is made of light bronze or brass, and has at the bottom a small hole:
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and on one side, it has three holes;
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and two on the other, and one on the other;
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	and the end is shaped like a feather, and that is the shape of the incision from which the scribes cut feathers:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	at the top there is a groove, so that when the instrument comes to the pus, it will immediately go onto the instrument;
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	so draw off half or a third, for if you draw off more than is proper in that hour, by chance the patient may die from the shock to his spirit, or he will faint, or he will approach death;
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the malady signify, and his pulses;
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	then treat the instrument and retain the water, which is now retained by the plug that blocks the hole on the syphilis, about which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner;
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	then restart the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering from that, and treat a little water;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	do this every day, and keep applying until there is no more water but a little bit of water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt the patient, and leave a lot of water, then treat with hot sand or sachet, and by much sweating or bathing and in the sun, and drink tea;
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	and treatment with drying medications until they are healed, and cauterize the stomach and liver and spleen after the extraction of the pus, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born without a foreskin, or with a small foreskin, or one that is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If necessary, cut into the foreskin with a very thin knife according to this method:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	then place a small, fine plug of wool in the urethra, and tie it and hold it there for three or four days. When he wants to urinate, remove the plug and let him urinate, then replace the plug.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Perhaps this is not necessary, because the pus that comes out will not allow it to close.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those whose foreskin is small, if they are circumcised with a sharp knife, as we have said, will enlarge.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have an opening in their place are bloated, because some are born with the opening at the head of the penis, which prevents them from urinating until they lift their penis upwards.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	They cannot ejaculate because the material cannot reach the bladder, and this is a serious disease.Et ceux qui ont le pertus bas, tel pertuis est plus grant et plus large que l’auter; et quant il se tient en litiere et s’assied, li urine ne puet venir a la marris, si qu’il
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, then the top of the rod and the cup are also as big as a feather, so that the hole piece in the middle, as it should be.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And beware of bleeding that often occurs, and if it happens, then stop the flow of blood from whoever is bleeding, and cure the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of pustules on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Many times these warts come on the penis, and they are an ugly-looking growth;
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and there are both malicious and harmless ones;
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	so you should grab them with a needle subtly, and cut and clean all of them, then put cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment on top;
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure it with diaphenicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, discolored and putrid, then you must apply cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have cut it, and if the wart is on the head of the penis, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, then you should remove the wart that is inside first;
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	And when it is sewed up, then heal it.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you sew it up together, the scrotum is not secure so it can be pierced, and blackness and corruption come in his penis and testicles;
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	You must cut out all that is black and rotten, then apply a plaster of honey and wheat flour made from pomegranate bark and fennel, then heal it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if there is bleeding, use the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	Cauteries have two uses together: l’un est qu’il tue la carne corrumpute et li maux
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	One is that it kills rotten flesh and the disease, that is, in bloodletting and corruption; l’auter si est a la dislocation, que il rassoie li
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	The other is for dislocation, to smooth the joints and if the scrotum is rotten and retracted, you must insert a rod into the penis, and the patient will urinate through it.
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	and when the foreskin is swollen at the head of the penis, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or due to a wound or abscess, you must therefore scrape it with a sharp instrument, as far as the ligature, and free the glans of the penis all around;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	and if it is a serious matter to discuss this, you must scrape it with a sharp spatula or knife, starting from the head of the penis and moving down;
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	then gently pull it apart and place a thin damp linen cloth in the opening to prevent it from swelling again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not a dislocation like other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Nevertheless, when we perform this operation by choice, and properly on children, it is necessary to do the best and most gentle work for their safety.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not mention the circumcision of their infants, for they did not practice it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experimentation.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I have seen most of the masters and healers who perform circumcision around the glans, and on foreskins, and on all new-borns.
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	if it were the hernia because there are two membranes, and by chance one is above and the other below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	Then they cover it, and the pain is doubled, and in the purification which is done on the glans is not assured, the end of the member.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	and in the purification of the nail, by accident the iron slips and they ruin the work, and many times they are born so that they don't need purification, and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the purification that is done forcefully all around the thread of hair, I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut justly both above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, you cut evenly all around.
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but the thread should be well wound around the skin.
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and the manner of the first work is that you should make the child think, if he hears, that you only tie the thread around the penis, and then you let him go in all the ways you can;
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	then make it stand upright between your hands, and conceal the strength between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the tools.
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	then put your hand on the penis and breathe or cough, and pull it upwards until the head of the penis is exposed;
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	then cleanse it well of the dirt that has accumulated there, then tie the cut area with a double thread, then tie it under the scrotum to the other testicle;
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and hold it by the testicles with your index finger and thumb, and press between the two threads, then quickly lift the foreskin and pull the head of the penis;
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	then let the blood flow little by little, because it is the venom;
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and place powder on top and on top of the powder a cloth glued with a roasted egg yolk tempered with rose water, cooked in good and fresh rosemary oil, and let it stay until the next day, and then treat it again until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The form of forces for purification is as follows:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	the two knives should be thin and sharp, and the handles should be as long as the palm equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	The mistake in purification is when the blood vessels inside are cut during the incision;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	Therefore, you must stretch it with your fingernail, so that the skin becomes an abscess;
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	and grasp it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then hold it with tweezers, and then grasp it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if it lasts for 3 days, and what is under the skin is swollen, then leave it until the abscess is relieved and the skin is lightly scraped;
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	then grasp it as you can, and beware of the part of the penis, it will not harm him in any way.Et s’il est desoz la verge enflez, si le laisse tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez; et li vout quier en l’end
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Therefore treat the site of sudden wounds with powder, as we have said in the treatise on powders, and if one applies it too generously, and it goes above, it will do no harm.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cure it, therefore, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	from the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is due to a stone, or frozen blood, or bowels, or unformed matter, or similar things that we have described in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	And if the urine is not loosened and you see that it is retained by a stone which is stuck in the neck of the bladder, then you must have the patient bend his knees;
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	and place his feet on his back, and arch his belly from the part above his back, and restrain the patient's breathing as hard as he can;
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and then the neck of the bladder is compressed to express the stone above, causing the urine to be released;
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must use an instrument called a 'syringe' to extract it. The syringe is made thus:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	It should be made of thin silver wire, like the feather of a bird;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The tube should be about a palm and a half in length, and thin at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And to make the urine flow out in this way, you must take a length of double thread and tie a small plug of wool or cotton onto it. Then insert the tip of the thread into the syringe;
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and cover the excess wool with oil or butter and a little egg white, then have the patient sit on a chair. Then anoint his bladder and penis with moist oil or olive oil and warm water;
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	then place the syringe gently into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then double the penis upwards towards the scrotum;
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	then fill the syringe before it reaches the bladder, and the patient will feel the pain travel to the empty space; if this is not done according to this order, then because the person guiding where it goes is wrong;
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	then tightly wind the thread all around the wool, and urine will follow the wool, then pull it out, and make the urine flow;
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and use the syringe again until the bladder is emptied and the pain is alleviated.
des maladies de la vessie	of diseases of the bladder:
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When burns or blood come in the bladder, or pus is accumulated there, and you see water and medicine distilling, then do this to all of the instrument that is called "clepsydra", and it is formed:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It is closed and has three openings:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	two on one side and one on the other, as you can see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	and the hair-like channels through which the medicine passes must be such that it blocks the penis without addition, and one can milk out moisture and fill when necessary;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	and when you see your medicine flowing in the bladder, place the tip of the syringe into the moisture, and draw out what is inside.
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	then suck up the moisture with the syringe, and then close off the opening firmly.
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	if it enters inside, it will now reach the bladder, and the patient will feel it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	and this is how you prepare the subtle enema to cleanse the bladder:
si est ci:	take:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	A vessel made of silver or brass, with its spout pointing upwards;
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and below it has a hole or slit;
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	then take a lamb's bladder and place it on the fire to heat up, along with the water you intend to use for the enema. Tie the bladder with a strong thread, making sure the knot is tight;
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	then insert the tip of the enema into the penis, and squeeze your hand over the bladder to release the water gradually, until the patient feels it has reached his bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make it into a circle, and pierce it evenly all around.
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	then thread a strong wire through these holes, then assemble the circle as one would assemble a ball, and put inside what you wish of oil and moisture and water, and fasten it in the instrument.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and do as you did with the bladder, squeezing by hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have already discussed in the division of stones the methods and extraction together with medicines;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	and I said the difference between a stone in the kidney, and all the signs, and which kind of stone one must operate on;
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder, and in the penis;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder occurs more often in children, and it is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder like water in its subtlety;
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	And he pulls out the hair, and twists his scrotum, and he hurts him many times, and then he stops.
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and this causes the foundations to crumble;
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and healing is quick in children until they are four years old, and it is slow in the elderly, and it is moderate in those between youth and old age;
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	and the cure is quicker in those who have large stones than in those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is fitting first to cleanse the patient through enema, to draw out all the feces which are in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it sometimes blocks the search for the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the feet and lift him up and move him around so that the stone sinks to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it will come out from above;
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	then let him sit between your hands, with his hands under his thighs so that the bladder is completely tilted downwards;
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	then feel and touch inside;
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	if you feel the stone within the cavity, then you must cut upon the stone now.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not give way to pressure, then wet your left index finger with oil, if the patient is adult, or your middle finger if the patient is young;
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	and insert it into his anus, and feel for the stone within his urethra, and when you feel it with your finger, draw it gently into the bladder's neck;
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	then press upon your finger, and the stone will move out of the way where you intend to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And instruct the assistant to press upon the bladder with his hand, and tell him to extend the scrotum upwards with his right hand, and with his left hand pull back the skin underneath the testicles in the area where the incision will be made;
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	then insert the spatulum, which is curved in shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And they do so between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but to the side of the left arse cheek.
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	and be straight on the stone, and your fingers be close to the anus, and the incision should be diagonal so that it is wide at the top and narrow at the bottom, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	by chance the pressure from the fingers which are by the anus may cause it to jump out without effort.
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	and know that there is such a stone where there are edges and margins:
si est griés a issir;	if it is easy to push out;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	and some which are underneath, similar to a grape, and round, whose passage is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	For those therefore where there are edges and margins, make the incision larger;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	and if it does not jump out, then you must hold steady with tweezers which are as sharp as a knife at the tip, to extract the stone so that it does not escape;
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	or you put underneath the instrument a subtle bandage on the head;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you cannot trick it in this way, then widen the hole, and if there is bleeding, then stop it with vitriol;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	and if there is more than one stone, then stop the largest at the neck of the bladder first, then cut above it, then pull it out, and then the smaller ones after it if there are several.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then it must be seared, and a larger wound made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For there are two things that happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	either he dies or the urine comes out through the wound where the urethra cannot heal;
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but nevertheless, try to pull it out, or tear it with pincers, pulling it out in pieces;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	and when you have finished your work, stop the bleeding with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it steady, then put on a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess;
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	then treat the patient on his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, wash the area well with oil and water, then treat the wound with thin ointment and thick ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if abscesses, scabs and blood clots come to the wound and congelation of blood in the bladder, and there is retention of urine due to this, known in such a way that without salt with the urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	then put your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains there, it will corrupt the bladder and destroy it.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then cleanse the wound with water, vinegar and salt, and assist the patient in every way you know until he is healed.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	and it is necessary that every hour as you treat him, to tie his two thighs together and apply the medication on the affected area.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the stone is small and located in the passage of the penis, pierced through it and let the urine flow out.
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	if the patient with such an injury, which you treat many times, is then excused from further treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have tried this before.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take an iron needle with three pointed ends and insert it into a hot brand:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	Then take a thread and tie it around the base of the stone so that it cannot return to the bladder.
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	Then push the wire into the base gently until it reaches the stone;
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	and turn the wire in your hand within the stone little by little until you can pierce the stone from the other side;
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	then urine will flow immediately, then press your hand on what is remaining of the stone within the wire.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	If it is broken at once and comes out with the urine, the patient is healed;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	and if you cannot do this due to any resistance, tie a wire underneath the stone and another one above it, then push the wire between the stones with both wires in place, then pull it out, untie the wires and clean the congealed blood in the wound;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of women's stones
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	It sometimes happens that a stone becomes impacted in women, and if it does, the treatment is difficult, and it is prohibited for three reasons:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	one is that the woman may be a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	and the second is that one cannot find a skilled woman who will undergo examination, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third reason is that one may not be able to find a skilled woman in this art of medicine;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	and the fourth reason is that the woman's stone is often deeper than a man's, so a deeper incision is required, and there is greater fear involved. And if necessity demands it, you should press a skilled midwife into service, and with great difficulty force her to do so, and if you cannot find such a midwife, then a wise and cunning but unchaste woman will suffice;
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	and have a wise woman examine her, or a woman who knows something of medicine, and instruct her to do what you tell her from your examination of the stone.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and be sure to check if the woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then she should push out her bowel and search for the stone.
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she finds it, then she should push on her abdomen and constrict under her navel, and recommend that she push out her bowel or as the patient needs, and press her left hand firmly on her bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	If she finds it, then she should move it inch by inch from the entrance of the bladder all the way down to the root of the thigh.
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	Then she should press on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the urethra, where it is most sensitive, and feel for the stone in that area.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and do not move your hand above or below the stone, and make the incision small at first;
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	then open the incision wider if you feel that the stone is cutting into the wound so much that it can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones;
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	that is to say, small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and they come in many shapes.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	you will know what to look for in order to identify the type of stone.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if the blood flows, then put crushed vitriol in place, and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops;
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	then return to your work until the stone is out, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of stones for men to help you with your task;
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	and if the blood flows and it is an artery that has been cut, then put the powder on the wound and press hard with bandages and bindings, and do not stop pressing, and leave the stone and do not try to pull it out, for the patient might die;
puis cure la plaie.	then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the swelling has gone down, return to your work so that the stone comes out.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Ramice aquous is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white albumen, which is beneath the shell of an egg.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	It is called "syfac", and sometimes it is found in the yolk of the egg, if one believes that it is another egg.
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	It is the skin of the egg between the white albumen that we have mentioned.
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	And this happens rarely.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramice is due to weakness that comes to the testicles and is spread out from there.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And sometimes it comes from a blow to the eggs, and this moisture has many colours:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	or yellow, or colourless, or black, or watery white, and more besides.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And these are the signs to know this assembly, for if it is in the white albumen that we have mentioned, then the abscesses are small, as long as an egg, and do not pierce the shell, for there is moisture all around it.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the fabric itself, then the abscesses burst with an egg yolk, and because of this they think it is another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	and if the moisture is between the skin of the scrotum and the testicle, then he feels good;
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, examine all the way around, because the form is as described above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, then, what comes after the insertion point, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we treat it with iron, then the patient should be bled according to his strength and the fullness of his body;
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	then have him lie on his back, on something slightly raised, and put a lot of bedding under him;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	then sit on his left, and instruct the assistant to sit on his right, and extend the scrotum towards one of the two sides of the heart;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	take the spatulate lead, and cut the skin of the scrotum from its base up to the testicle, and make the incision straight while slicing through the skin of the scrotum until you reach the white membrane, and carefully peel it away according to your ability.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	then pierce the testicle with a large needle and draw out all the water, then place your fingers in it, and it will rise again.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the heart of the testicle, but only the membrane.
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	cut it all around in sections, cutting the membrane carefully and not too deeply, for if you cut it badly, the water will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	and if the testicle bursts during your work, then reset it in its place when you have finished working on the membrane.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then stitch together the two lips of the heart of the testicle with one stitch, then treat it as you would any other wound until it heals.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	If you find that the egg is corrupted by another disease, then you should tie off the suspended vessels, fearing the flow of blood;
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	then cut open the scrotum throughout its suspension, and extract the testicle, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if pus has collected into two parts together, know that these are two sacs;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	then cut open the other part in the same way you did the first, then wipe away the blood and put soft linen soaked in rosemary oil into the wound;
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put another piece of soft linen soaked in wine and oil over the testicles, and place double layers of cloth over them, and tie it all together following this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two pieces of cloth and fill them with wool according to this shape and sew them together at the opening of the breeches, and one of the cloth pieces should reach from the anus to the back, and the other to the groin area;
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	and the other two on the two sides of the armpits, and all the restraint gathered at the buckle of the girdle;
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and sometimes medicine this ramification of cautery in place of the knife-edge of iron, and it is that you press the delicate knife, and cut the skin of the testicles, and it is heated as we have said, so that the white membrane containing the water is exposed;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	if you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that membrane gently, and scorch it with this delicate hot cautery;
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And scrape it in all ways that you can, until you draw out everything;
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and be careful that the fire does not touch the testicle;
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	and know that this operation is much safer;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and must guard against bleeding and the wounds of cutting;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if anything opposes you, whether an abscess, or bloodletting, or something else, then cure what opposes you, according to what has already been said.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this procedure due to its horribleness, then use perforation as I have told you, and when you are certain by the signs we have mentioned that the pus is gone, then let the patient sit on a high seat:
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	then pierce the abscess in the part below at the full width of the spatula, and insert the perforator deep into the body;
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	and make the hole wide so that all the pus can flow out;
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then put cotton on the wound, and tie it, and let the remainder of the pus drain, then treat the wound until it is healed;
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	and if the white membrane does not let the pus out through the mouth of the wound, then you must push a feather or the instrument used to treat the water in hydrops into the wound, as described earlier;
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And the wound will open more widely and you will know that the fluid is returning, and it will come together after six months or around there, and when it has come together as before, thus the illness will pass its course.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the testicle abscess
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	You should know that in the dissection of this nerve there is fear of many dispositions, because of which I think it is better to leave it alone:
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you the work and the appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	Therefore I say that many abscesses come in the body, and especially in the genitals;
et c’est par mout de cas.	and this is for many reasons.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	This is to know by an excess of sharp and bitter humor, which is spread in the genitals, or from a blow;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	and the color of the abscess according to the color of the body;
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and does not cease to be painful, and is a serious abscess;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and sometimes there is an abscess grey and purulent and puss-filled, and sometimes it comes from a vein, or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from a vein, it is recognizable by the hot nature of the abscess when you press it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and you must not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	That which is from swelling of a vein is recognizable by its appearance when touched, and one can well make an incision on this type of abscess, and others like it;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and you should cut the skin of the testicles, then the yolk will rise to the top, and the white part will become solid, and it will release the suspensory ligament from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the yolk is already soured with these new characters, then you should cut open the egg and scrape it out;
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is on the skin or within the vessels, you must release all that tension and smooth out the lump.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the crack is at the back of the shell, then you must crack it all and extract the egg as we have said.Et s’il y a u neuue char ou dedens la tenve, si covient que tu la cope et la delivre, et mets l’uef en autre vaissel.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is done, then dress the wound with soft wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the testicle abscess
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapper like a berry, with the softening of the testicles, and it makes the patient very sick when he goes.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and the treatment of this disease is just as fearful as the one above, and yet we will still describe its treatment according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	You must make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then put the suspensory of the testicles down to your fingers, all along the vessels that are closest to the penis, and squeeze them firmly, and stretch them out;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	then incise widely with a sharp spatula across the vessels, so that they are exposed, and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then thread a needle with double thread, and tie it to the first place where the wire came out, and tie it directly to the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then cut away at the skin evenly, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisture.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then treat the wound as in other wounds, so that no blood vessels are cut that nourish one of the testicles.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for there is no harm in this, and if the wire comes out through all the blood vessels, then the testicles must be pulled out of all the blood vessels.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the artery does not lose its nourishment due to the cutting of the blood vessels, and dry up and can no longer help itself.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rotgut wound
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The causes of this dislocation are due to the incision that comes from the armpit or the extension over the belly in the part of the inguinal canal, causing the intestines to descend from that opening to one of the testicles.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	and this dislocation occurs in the socket or from its extension, and these two methods come from many causes:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	or from impact, or from jumping, or from crying, or from lifting a heavy load, and through similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs that it is from the extension of the socket, are that it happens little by little over a long time, and does not occur suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the abscesses are even throughout, towards the depth, because the socket presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of the section of the sinus, that it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and there are different abscesses appearing underneath the skin close to the surface, and it is due to the discharge of the intestines and the body from the sinus.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the fester comes with the intestines, and is retained inside, and causes great suffering to the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments using iron, there is fear, which is why one should avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the method of treatment is that you instruct the patient to push the intestines back into the wound with his hand, if he can;
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then hold his neck between your hands and lift his hips;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then lean the chest upwards, and cut all the skin of the long bones;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then insert hooks into the sides of the incision according to what you need to open the wound, and let it be such that the pus can come out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then scrape off the scurf that is under the skin of the scrotum, until the hard white scurf is uncovered all over.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	then insert your index finger into the scrotum, between the white scurf that is under the skin of the testicle and between the second scurf, and separate what is behind the testicle and between the second scurf.
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and then move your right hand into the scrotum, and have the white scurf facing up towards your left hand, and lift the testicle out of all the scurf towards the incision.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the assistant to extend the testicle upwards, and loosen what is tight behind the scrotum;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and examine with your fingers if he has any hard, white, membrane-like object in his intestines, and if you find anything, push it back down into the abdomen below.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	Then take a needle with a thick thread made of six fibers, and insert it into the rear part of the membrane which is behind the scrotum's skin.
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	After threading the needle, pull the thread through the foreskin, leaving about twelve fibers exposed.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	Then tie the fibers together in a cross shape and use it to tie the membrane, which we mentioned is under the scrotum's skin, with a strong knot of two parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the threads around the testicles and tie them securely with a knot of two parts, ensuring that no blood vessels that supply them can pass through, so that no abscess forms.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and put the plaster according to the first long line of two parts of this, and after these two lines let the syphon which is under the heart of the testicles be the larger part of an egg;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and after all the rest according to the roundness that the egg carries;
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	then cup in the part which is under the skin of the testicles, as much as the blood flows, and the bowels, as we have said before;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then bring soft wool moistened in oil, and put it on the wounds, and then bring the plaster that we have described.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white syphilis that we have described is cauterized after the incision, due to doubt about blood flow.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this happens many times, and let the plaster hold until it bites through it;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it takes a long time to bite through, then be anointed with warm water, and put on what we have said, until it bites through;
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then treat the wound with other treatments, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said that it is done like the thread which is together with the screw, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after the incision slightly above or below.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	then press on it, and treat the abscess of the one who operates, until the vessels leak;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	Sometimes a rupture occurs in the intestines, as we have said, and the orifice opens;
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and none of the intestines come out through it, and if any do, it is a little, and it is repaired every hour;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and nevertheless, if he stays too long in this state, the wound putrefies and suppurates, so that the intestines protrude;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this happens because of the extension of the pus which is in the intestines, as we have said, for it is extended, then softened and swollen, and the orifice opens;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	and the treatment if by cautery, as we have said before;
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and sometimes it is treated with iron in this way:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	and the patient lies on his back between your hands, then apply the cautery to the root of the wart according to its size, three times;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then extract the skin tag underneath the skin, and then take the hair and place it on the visible spot where the tag was;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press it firmly into the belly button, then cut the two visible spots on the hair shaft where the tag was, and cut both of them;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then pull out the hair shaft, and do not touch the skin tag or spread anything on it, as I have instructed you in the treatment for intestinal worms;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	then treat it like a wound.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, it cleans and cures the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	Syrup is constricting and has no appearance in the wound, and cautery is better for this purpose and closer to safety.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Many times the skin of testicles becomes soft in some men because the organs inside are softened and it is noticeable to look at.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	And when one wants to cure it, one should make the patient lie on his back, and press the soft skin on top of the natural skin;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	Then bring together the two lips with one stitch, and if you see it, sew the excess of the soft skin firmly with three or four stitches.
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Then press between the stitches, and heal it like other wounds until it is healed, and remove the thread.
dou chastrement	of chastisement
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	You should know that castration is considered a sin in our law, and because of this, I would prefer not to discuss it in this book.
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	It is only necessary for two reasons:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	The first is that surgeons know how to respond when asked, and they know how to treat it.
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	and the others, because we often have need of the castration of certain beasts to help us, such as of a ram and a ewe and a kid and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say then that there are two types of castration:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	either by pulling or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In the type of castration that we perform by pulling, we make the animal sit in warm water so that the testicles are softened and dangling;
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	then grab them with your hand, until they are dislodged and you no longer feel them.Et la beste soit contrainct a demourer en aigue si longuement, tant qu’il soit asseré par la cuiture
Du chastrement de taille:	Of the castration by cutting:Car il faut que tu sache, que a nul
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	You should know that you must tie the scrotum with your left hand and press the skin of the testicles, then cut through both at once, when you have well-scalded them;
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and let some pus remain under the skin, and the subtle pus which is beneath the vessels.
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	and this method of castration is better than that which is done by pulling, because with the pulling some testicle might remain, causing the beast to desire sex.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	then heal the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	There are two types of hermaphrodites in men:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	one is where between the two testicles there appears as much as the shape of a woman's nature, and it has hair, and sometimes it urinated standing up.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other method is for women, and it has on the buttock a rod-like protuberance and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the treatment for both men and women is that you cut open the scrotum all around, and treat it as you would other wounds:
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	In the second type of hermaphrodite, men whose urine exits through the skin of the testicles require no treatment.
de la tentigene	of the testicles
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	A pustule is an unsightly swelling on the natural part.
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	And some women have them as large as a hand, and that is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	You should smear the excess of the pustule with your hand or a knife, and then cut it lightly;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not cut too deeply so that bleeding occurs, but cure the pustule with another cure until it is healed;
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	and apply an ointment to another wound that arises at the mouth of the pustule; and perhaps it will burst, and is similar in appearance to a boil, and for this reason the ancients called it the 'cow disease'.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you must treat it, as we have said, with cautery, and heal it until it is cured.
de erratique	of erratics
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	It is erratic when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the opening is small; and if the pustule bursts and the blood flows out, it is cured by another cure until it is healed.
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	and is natural at birth, or accidental due to illness;
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	or it is caused by a wound, or by a subtle or dense toxin, and is made deep in the head, or in the sides, or below, or wherever it may be;
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	and conception, and childbirth, and perhaps flowers to have;
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	and the knowledge of the stars is through the observation of their paths.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the tumors are visible nearby, then use your fingers or a probe.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is so subtle that it approaches the two books, then you will hasten and they will surround him thus:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	Place your two index fingers together, and let the woman be on her back with her legs spread;
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	Then the two books are formed, so that the subtle star is surrounded, and the spell is cast over him;
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	Then take wool, wet it in oil, and place it on the spot, and let the woman lie at home every day, so that she may not sweat.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the ulcer is hard and thick, then you must cut it with a spatulum like a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the spell is for a male child, then they suspend it on an ox and a he-goat;
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	And have stanching medicines, such as agrimony, dragon's blood, incense, together with egg white;
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	then administer a wide leaden cane, so that the wound does not heal closed;
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and thus it remains for a long time, and then a tent of dry linen is administered;
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then it is cleaned with other cleansings until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when there is fresh blood in a wound, it must be covered in this way, unless it is an abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For one must not cut into an abscess that is in the breast.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins from which blood flows without a break in the habit, and when hemorrhoids are old they become thrombosed;
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	And we have said in the division of similarities of us, and the signs, and I will say here those that receive cure.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and thrombosed external hemorrhoids, when they are perfectly formed in the anus and do not appear on examination, are not cured by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those which are at the mouth of the anus, one can feel; these can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	Therefore, you should put the woman in a cold room, then the uterus is held with tweezers, and the neck in its roots, then powder is applied to medicines that restrict blood flow, such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things;
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	then pour water over her feet for an hour, then put her in cold water;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	And if there is bleeding, let her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel and gall and similar things, then take barley flour, cook it with honey and garlic, and apply the ointment to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it is stopped up, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If not, make her breathe through straws on her back and breasts without piercing;
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	Then take wool, soak it in plantain juice or dogwood juice mixed with old wine, and breathe through it in the affected area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess has drained, treat the wound with ointment until it heals;
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	and that which is called “albathir” is red and looks like rough felt, so it should be covered as I have said;
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then treat it until it heals.
des apostemes de la marris	Here is the translation of the text into English:
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses arise in the body, such as sores and pus-filled abscesses and herpes and boil and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have described in the classification.Et li apotomes de fevre sont plusors: or l’un est de la fleme; or l’autre est de sang; or l’autre est de sang et de fleme.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	Therefore, I shall describe in this treatise the hot abscess that occurs in the brain, which is not one of those that form in the bowels;S’il vient sus le chevel, si lo fai couper sus la tete, et li fai un bouton d’or fin ou de fer, et li leu estrainne les senges qui vienne a l’aposteme.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	and if you wish to know the treatment with iron, look at whether the abscess is painful at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and whether it turns red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Therefore, do not hurry to pierce it, but let it fester until the pain is relieved;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	then make the patient sit on a low stool or chair, with his legs bent and feet supported, leaning forward onto his knees;
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	let his thighs be spread apart, and let him place his arms under his knees, and tie them there well with a good bandage;
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	then open the wound towards his right side, and insert the instrument to form the mouth of the wound, from which the pus will flow out afterwards;
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	and you must insert the instrument a little way in order to test the depth of the wound, so that when you insert the instrument further, it does not go in deeper than necessary and harm the patient;
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	and if the instruments are larger, then one must cover the depth of the wound with cloth so that the instruments do not cause pain;
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	one should put the point of the instrument at the top and hold it tightly.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when an abscess has been opened and one feels around in the wound with the hand, then one should cover the opening with a bandage, a sponge, or a cloth;
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	and when the bowels are emptied, one should put into the wound moist tents soaked in rose oil, or in dried green oil;
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	and put the tent above the wound at the bottom of the wound, and put over it a bandage and over that a clean lamb's wool soaked in water or mallows that have been cooked;
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then, after two days of treatment, until it is healed;
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and sometimes we raise it and the wound with a clyster of water and honey, then of water or cooked roots of iris and arisarum.
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	then return to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is closed in the wound, then you should guard against cooking with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	It is necessary for the midwife to know the natural shape of childbirth and its signs; when you see the woman pushing downward and desiring to smell the ar:
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	then the child hastens to come out;
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	then you know that this childbirth is following nature's course, and the afterbirth comes out with the child;
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	and when you see these signs, you should gently press her belly so that the child comes out quickly;
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	because when he emerges head-first, the afterbirth comes with him, and the birth canal is cleansed of its excess fluids through good cleansing;
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	and what comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For it sometimes comes under his feet, and comes out of his body or shoulder, and hands, or it comes on his stomach, or back, and is accidentally turned around his neck, and in other bad shapes;
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	It is necessary for the surgeon to be wise and cunning in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the shapes and how one should help them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the infant comes out of its head by a natural opening, and the woman gives birth painfully, and her strength is weak, then make her sit on a saddle, or have women hold her;
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	and place the الطبيب between their fingers the small spatula of which I spoke earlier:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and split the placenta, and scrape at its nail until the moisture that is inside flows out;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and press the woman's abdomen so that the child comes down, and if it does not come down, then the woman must be enema with a mustard poultice with oil of six herbs;
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	then have her pressed and sneezing with a condiment, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour:
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	if the child does not come out right away.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if both hands are born first, then you must gently reset them little by little:
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they cannot go in, put the woman on a chair, and lift her feet up;
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	then tip the chair back onto the ground, and hold the woman upright so that she does not slump forward;
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and if the hands cannot go in and the child is dead, cut the hands at the joint which was described earlier, take out the child, and reset it in the same way.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the child's feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the infant comes onto its feet, it must be pushed upright.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	And then rock it back and forth until it is steady.
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then grip one of its feet and stretch it out gently.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	Let the child jump up to its armpits, instruct it to grab hold, and then make it sneeze forcefully.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps, God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump out as we have said, then pull it back and forth gently until it is in its natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it will be easy.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it does not jump as we desire, take mustard seeds, and six-year-old oil, and melted gum, and grind them all in a mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and apply this ointment to the woman's genitals, then make her sit in warm water up to her ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is soft underneath, put a myrrh collar on her and let it sit for an hour.
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then have her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and lightly press her belly, for the child will jump now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the birth of the child on his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this way, he puts his hands on it bit by bit.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	then she should lie on her back, and her feet hang down, and she should lie on the bed.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and fold her hands bit by bit, and then she presses her hands on her belly, and takes the cushions from under her, so that she is aligned downward.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the child does not jump, take her feet and move them around, then move her belly upward, then press with your hands.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and rock the child bit by bit.
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and instruct the woman to press until the child emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the child's exit, which comes out as wide as a hand
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	You should trick your hand into emerging:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if it cannot be returned, then have the woman walk and stand.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot walk, then have her lie on her bed and lift her legs straight up;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then bring the mustard plaster that I mentioned earlier;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not give birth, then have her sit on a chair and study how to return the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and bring out the child according to its natural shape, and have her sneeze, and command that she hold on until the baby comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the baby's exit on its neck, and have her hands spread out, and her face turned towards her mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	I should grip her hand, then push it little by little, and move it gently;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is even, put on the mustard plaster of vinegar and oil, as we said, then command that she move little by little;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	and when you have done this, have her sit on a chair, and command that she holds on;
et la fai esternuer.	and let it sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same way for all of the afterbirth
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When all the secondina comes out in this way, then grip the secondina with your nail until the moisture is released;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if the infant vomits on its face and neck, grip it by the head until the moisture is released and the infant dies;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then put the infant back inside, so that it is positioned correctly, and instruct the woman to grip herself a few times:
adonques si istra legierement.	then she will be delivered easily.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born;
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	and this is not a strange thing, but it happens rarely.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	They are strange, and do not live long if they are;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they are multiplied, and are separated by the placenta, which is attached to the womb;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and sometimes they emerge as naturally as a tooth, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they emerge painfully, then the surgeon should follow our instructions, and be subtle, quick, and light-handed in what he does.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and thus act as he sees fit for their health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	Sometimes they are formed in the womb in one, two, three, four, five, six or seven, or more to fifteen, and they are all formed like children in the measure of the glorious sage, and the surgeon should know all this, because sometimes similar things happen.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	then he should act according to what is appropriate.Et s’il avient que il ait en la marris uns ou plusors qui ne se
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you are treating a woman for a dead child or an abdomen, as I have said in the section on obstetrics, and there is no movement, and you are forced to use your hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	then you must know if the woman is of sound mind, and has no accident where she has fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	then the woman should be laid on her back, with her hips tilted down, and her legs raised;
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the midwife should apply the herbal remedy to the perineum if she is tied to the bed so that she does not drop the baby;si la femme est sovinee sus ses deux chiés, et li ministre lui teigne la vouture entre les deux jambes;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then the woman is laid on her two hips, and the midwife applies the herbal remedy to the perineum between the two legs; then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oils mixed with mustard seed and fenugreek and linseed, then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and herbs;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	then they are put into the mother gently, then they examine where she feels the pinching that is suitable for this, and take care if the child is positioned to descend on its head;si la marris ne senton point la dislocation des chiés qu’il faille le chié droit ou le gauche, puis les bouton en legierement ou il faille, si la marris senton li enfes apparilliez a dessendre, s’il est legierement apparilliez, si doit il estre dessendue
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	if they put the weasels on their eyes, or in their throat, mouth, palette, under their beard, in their armpit, or near their ribs, and if the swelling is on the feet, they should be placed on the feet, and on the sides.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary to hold the weasel in their right hand, and place the cloth between their left fingers, and tie it around their whole hand lightly, then insert the weasel into any of the places that we have mentioned, until it reaches the hollow.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is how to prepare the weasel:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then place another weasel against it, or one-third of the size if you need more, so that the extractions are equal.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	then they are pressed equally from both sides, to push out, and the weasels are held in place with teeth, like this:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if any part of it remains, then anoint one of his fingers with oil, and rub it in that part, and draw out the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if nothing remains, then place this incision higher up, and do this until it all comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be returned due to the tightness, then you must wrap a cloth around it, until it all comes out;
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	then apply the cupping in the bend of the wrist or at the elbow, and so you must do for the other hand, and also for the feet.Et si il demoure ainscun sang, si le mets sus I drapeil, et le tiens tant qu’il fuie tout;
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if any blood remains, then place it on the cloth and hold it until it all comes out; And if the head of the child is large and it is tight in the birth canal, or if there is a gathering of pus at the head, then you must insert the spiny spatum between your fingers, pierce the head, and draw out the pus;
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or to use the instrument called "almidach", from which the form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and thus the same way, make if the child has a large head naturally;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and then pull out the bones with tongs, and if the head jumps out and is forced, let it be broken, until the moisture that is in the wound comes out;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot come out, then cut it in pieces to the extent that you can;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen on the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce it so that the moisture runs out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the swelling is above his feet, the pulse is light, and the breath comes easily to the mouth.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is constricted in the belly or the foot, then you must stretch it with your hand wrapped in a cloth;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and cut open the belly or the foot so that the moisture that is inside comes out;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and if the other limbs are paralyzed, and the neck remains, then he puts his hand into the wound up to the mouth of the wound;
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	then he puts in a hook or two, and pulls it out;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	and if the mouth of the wound is constricted by a hot abscess that has come to it, then one should not work on it, but apply moist and fatty substances;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and he applies poultices, and uses warm moistening fluids.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the testicle is on his side, and you can make it even, then apply what we have said about a living child;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if one has no power over it, he pulls it out in pieces, leaving nothing of the testicle behind.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, apply what we have said about hot abscesses that come to the wound;et s’il vient de lassitude ou de fraicheur, si amenistre choses froides et molifians.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if blood flows, let it be placed in a water restraint, and administer other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose fetus had died within her; then another was sewn over him, and the other died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time an abscess came in his arm, and swelled so much that it opened, and began to discharge profusely.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the priest, and I thought long and hard, but could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong drawing plaster, and out came a bone, and after a few days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very amazed, because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I wanted to see the wound, and as soon as I laid hands on it, the woman felt better.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and the woman lived for a long time like that, and then she suddenly died.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	And I haven't mentioned this chapter before because when masters find something strange, they know how to treat it.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to return the dislocated shoulder to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Now we come to the form of pressure which is found in books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and in the second turn, at the head of the second line.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle and made of ivory or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and the mouth of the tube should be two fingers wide and the rim of the trees one and a half palms long;
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and let the two limbs be made of the same wood, which are firmly joined together at one end and separated by half a palm's width or slightly more at the other.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	and these two extensions are fitted into the mouth of the wound to open it when the two horns are turned.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	A more subtle and lightweight form is made of boxwood or ebony, according to the appearance of tongs;
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and has two extensions, as you see, a palm long and two digits wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and when you see the wound open to all the instrument, then let the woman lie on her bed, with her feet hanging and her legs open, then insert the two extensions together into the wound, and hold the head of the instrument between her thighs;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then work your hand into the instrument, just as you did with the tongs, depending on how much you want to open the mouth of the wound, until the patient does what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	This instrument is completely decorated and has many variations in its appearance.
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	And when the patient sees them prepared, the operation is faster and more skilled for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despair over the instrument, but prepare it, for their need is inexcusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you should instruct the patient to hold back her breath, then make her sneeze gently, and then squeeze her mouth and nose tightly;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if she vomits, all the better.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, take a pot and place herbs that can open the mouth of the wound inside, such as chamomile, anise, rue, camphor, and centaury;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	all these herbs, or any of them, are cooked in water over fire;
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	then put one end of the pipe into the pot and the other end into the mouth of the patient, and apply it until the vapors enter the patient's mouth;
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	then make the patient sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the pus comes out quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if she remains after this treatment and does not pass away, as we have said, command the midwife to wet her left hand in oil of assafety or in a poultice of alder, and then put it into the birth canal, and draw out the placenta;
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and when she has found it, she should grab it and stretch it little by little, straightening it out, so that the patient does not feel pain during extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	but she must move it gently to the right and left, and then pull it out;
si venra et se desaerdra.	it will come and be released.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the wound is tight, we have described the cure for sneezing, and the fumigation of herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not cured by all that we have said, then be sure to follow the treatment;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that he who is at the mouth of the wound be tied to the thigh of the woman, then cleanse her with a four-fold ointment;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	if she expels and releases it, and comes out;
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	but still, when she expels, a bad odour comes to the stomach and head, and the disease worsens.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	Therefore, it is necessary to use suitable fumigations:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	some of the ancients have tried fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The instrument used to fumigate the woman for retained placenta and afterbirth is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	It is like glass, and one puts the narrow end in the wound, and the wide end above the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and apply the fume to the coals, and to the lice until they are gone, then start another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the fundament
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born without their foreskin pierced; instead, it is closed by a thin membrane.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	So the midwife should pierce this membrane with her finger nail and not cut it with a sharp instrument, and she should be careful not to tear it.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put wet linen in wine and oil on the wound until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will heal, then put a wooden splint through the wound and leave it for several days, then remove it when the child wants to walk around.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And sometimes this membrane comes from a wound or an abscess suddenly;
si covient coper celui soudement:	then cover it quickly:et s’ele est en la bouche, si le met sus lainne mouille
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	and if it is in the mouth, then wet linen should be applied and treated as we have said about the caustic of the stone.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the fistula of the fundament
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that come from under the foreskin are called nodations, and those that grow from beneath the foreskin, or in the space between the two parts, are either single or multiple.Et s’ele est en la bouche, si le met sus lainne mouille
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	and when this knot is old, it opens, and often emits moisture or pus, and sometimes these ulcers are persistent;
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and they are caused when there is flatulence or vomiting, or sometimes a burst vessel.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if there are fistulas that pierce all the way to the bladder, and halfway down the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and they can reach all the way to the hip joint, and to the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one knows a persistent fistula in the anus, and not a persistent one;
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and you should thrust your index finger into the anus, and push a fine needle made of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no crookedness.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if there is crookedness, then push in a thin rod or horse hair until you feel the rod or hair with your finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and it does not come out through the anus as flatulence or wind, nor turn green, as we have said;
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	you know that it has not pierced through;
si te haste dou curer.	then cure it quickly.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula penetrates as far as the bladder or the duct of urine, and urine escapes, and cannot be stopped by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced just up to the hip joint, then the vein is flowing just up to that spot;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is a twisting and the pain spreads around, then it has entered there, and neither medicine nor poultices help;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these piercing sores there is no cure except through hard work, and the foolishness of those who meddle is useless.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In the one that is not pierced and is not old, there is hope of healing by fire, as I have proven, and the patient lies between your hands on his back;
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and he will raise his legs up to his thighs, and have his thighs inclined towards his belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then insert a tent of copper or lead, if there is any tortuosity that you know about, where the tent should go.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If he feels pain in his anus, then you must insert your index finger if the tent has not pierced him;
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	and where you feel the anus or the flesh, then you know that it is pierced;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if they cannot work on it, then it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	They say that some can still be healed, but that rarely happens;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the treatment that is given, they scorch the wound with a subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it was previously stated;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	and insert it fully into the fistula until it comes out from the anus;
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and do this two or three times until you know that these false hairs are singed, which resemble an owl's feather.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	then dress the wound with wet bandages in butter until these hairs come out, then dress the wound with ointment binding the hair and sealing it.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is healed in this way, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If this does not work, he cannot be healed otherwise;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if the tent pierces and does not reach the bone which is in the foundation, and there is between your finger and the tent a thick covering of hair or of syphac, and you see the fistula following the covering to the core;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if the tent is pulled at the beginning of the fistula and pushed in before the tent, and then cauterized afterwards until it reaches the tip of the tent;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and the tent will be delivered and will fall out;
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	then defecate those charred bones that look like bird feathers, and leave nothing behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the pus comes out and flows between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or with an astringent medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For fire cautery draws together two bone things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	that is to say, the burning of those charred bones, and the clotting of blood and the drying up of moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then the treatment of moist tents with butter or crushed things, until the bowels move, and let the burnt bones leave the body;
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then treat the wound of hard, dry, burning lumps, and the remedies are dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes all the way to the bottom of the foundation, and is removed from the body, put your finger or foundation in it, and inquire about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the bowels, and there is a lump of pus or char in it, about to burst, then there is no hope except through faith and hope, by administering one of three remedies:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut into it to the depth, or if you can, put in tents and treat it as before;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too deeply, lest you pierce the organ that holds the foundation, and cause the evacuations to emerge unwillingly through that channel;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then treat it as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	by chance, you may be healed by removing that covering and cleaning it after the wound has been exposed, either with a tent or another sharp instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then cut away at the diseased flesh within the wound as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	then strive to close the wound and stop the fistula from spreading in the region above the foundation:
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	if it is more beneficial for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And sometimes they are like this:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it is near the foundation beneath the skin, take a tent pierced at its tip in this shape:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And he inserts a twisted thread into it, and he inserts the tent along the entire thread into the fistula until it reaches the tip.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is perceived at the edge of the foundation within, then pull out the thread from that hole, as you would press your finger into the fundament.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and pull the end of the thread, and bring the two heads together, and press them against each other, and leave it for one or two days.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and restrain it sometimes so that the threads catch those hairs that are between, and grow together.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then cure the wound until it is healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not open on its own, then you must make it open in every way that you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not appropriate to cover the wound with a bandage, then treat it, as we have said, until it has healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spatulon spine which they make for the fistula is very sharp and pointed on one side.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	And on the other side it is not, so that one does not catch what one should not, as you can see here.
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Hemorrhoids occur in two ways:L’une est de la cossine qui se part en cossine en
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	or they are within the anus, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and some produce blood, and there may be one or more, and they are located within and at the top of the anus.
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	but those that protrude have a little moisture, and sometimes pus or a little yellow water or blood, and they are the colour of the body.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment for those who have them within the anus is that you instruct the patient to straining until they go into a chamber, so that the anus opens and the warts are visible.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	then grab it with tweezers or your fingernail, then pull it out by its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the tweezers cannot hold them because of their moisture, then take them with a piece of cloth, or cotton, or a piece of camel hair;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and pull them with your fingers, then press and powder on some hot powders that are in place of cautery;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you can cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then treat them with other treatments until they are healed;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the fundament cannot exit, then enema the patient with a harsh and asper enema to clean what is in the fundament so that it can exit clearly;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	then the patient defecates, and if the thread comes out of the anus, then the treatment is light;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and you should grab them with your fingernail or tweezers, and press, then treat as we have said, until it is healed and fears the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	You should administer the suturing in this way:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	take a twisted thread, and put it in a needle, and then draw the thread above and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn both ends of the thread under the needle, and let it be loose;
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and tighten the thread, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do likewise with all the others, and leave one to drain the excess blood;
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then place a moistened cloth in rose oil or cerate over the wound, and place it on the wound, and instruct the patient to rest;
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then let him stay until he defecates, and when it is passed, treat the wound with ointment and other remedies until it is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	from dryness of the anus or rectum
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Drying of the bowels occurs often in the intestines, due to constipation from natural causes, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If necessary, cut the tip of a spatula or your fingernail to create a scrape that does not leave moisture behind;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then treat it until it is cured as it should be;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot heal, then restart the scraping more fiercely than before, until it heals a lot and is scalded;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it until it is healed.
dou fremit	where there is trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A wart is a small appearance formed under the body, and goes very deep;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and sometimes the frost bites it, and one feels it like dead from trembling, and it comes all over the body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And its cure is that you take a straw of an goose feather, or a strong vulture feather, and place the straw on the trembling, until the purple circle trembles all around it;
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand to all of the straw until you scrape all around the trembling, and push it deeply in, and uproot the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see fit, make a cane of bronze or iron according to this shape, and let it be thin underneath and drawn out on top:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	it does not pierce, so as to keep it in place, and to press tightly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see, if you cauterize the tremor, as it is before the cautery chapter.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Sometimes they make a clyster of silver or of brass, or of melted copper or alloyed;
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	and sometimes they make these small and large instruments, according to those who have them.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those which are administered for the treatment of children and the weak and painful are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the small and large enema is above wide, or the belly is bound according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	and there is a deviation in the bellies, and the intestines are pierced inside, as you can see;
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	and on one side there are two openings, and on the other one;
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and the belly where one puts medicines is made of a beast's bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small openings, and there is about an inch between each opening, then insert into these openings a strong thread of twisted thread in the shape of X or entwined around, and assemble the belly so that it looks like a goat;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, then administer a clyster.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and this is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the tip of the clyster with oil or egg white, or similar, then insert it gently;
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	then the minister squeezes it with both hands together until it is empty, then removes the clyster and lets the patient lie on his side, and if the medicine wants to come out, he should press as hard as he can;
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if he sleeps for a night, it is even better.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you use the clistere for the disease of stomach ache, and the medicine rushes to come out, then repeat it until he is cured.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are in the anus or rectum, then the clyster should be as thin as for a child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the form of the thin clyster that presses against the skin:
des plaies	Of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have already discussed the treatment of wounds in the previous section.
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	Now we will discuss the cures using hands and medicine, according to their effectiveness.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and by what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The causes of wounds are due to the impact of stones, or cutting with a sword, knife, lance, spear, arrow, or similar objects.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	Wounds can occur in various parts of the body, such as the neck, head, leg, belly, liver, and other similar organs.
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	I will now discuss the treatment for each type of wound, starting with simple head wounds, as this will lead us to remember other related topics in this chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head, and the bone is not broken, you should first check if it was caused by the impact of a stone or similar object, and if the skin is still intact but the wound is large, and you suspect a hot abscess:
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	if he bleeds from the cephalic vein immediately, and there is little blood from the wound, and let the bleeding be in the opposite direction of the injured part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and prevent the patient from becoming bloated with wine and rich foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to bleed, then his food should be reduced, and he should not drink wine or eat meat;
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and place cotton wet with rose oil only on the wound, if hot abscesses appear; or wine with a styptic;
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no hot abscess, then place on the wound, if it has all its blood and has not been moved by the air, a powder which I will describe shortly;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it has been moved by heat, then place on it some ointments until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like that of a sword, and the lips cannot be brought together with tenting, then stitch them together, as I will describe for abdominal wounds.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is exposed to the bone, and it can be seen, and it is not holding on except for a little bit, then cut it off.
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	then heal the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods like testicles and cooked wheat, as well as meat, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find pus in the skin, and it is not reaching the bone, then cut off all the pus, and drain it out, then heal it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which causes bleeding that cannot be stopped by medicine, then tie it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if this does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is easy:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and you shall put this powder on so that the burn has moved.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the manner of the powder is as follows:
pren encens une partie;	take frankincense one part;
sanc de dragon II parties;	dragon's blood two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	burn the ingredients together and grind them into a fine powder, then apply it to the wound, pressing it firmly so that it sticks well and draws out all the blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	then bind it tightly, leaving it in place until the swelling goes down;
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	and one does not remove the medicine until the wound is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one does this with chalk alone, when one doesn't have incense or dragon's blood, but that the wound is moved by the fire.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the burn has moved the wound, simply leave it as it is, without applying any of the powder;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but apply some digestive poultices made from barley flour and water or honey, until the wound drains well;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat other wounds until he is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the fracture of the bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine tweezers:
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you about fractures of the head next.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound on the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound occurs on the neck and it is single, then there is no difference between it and one in the head, but if the nerve of the neck or artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is a nerve, do not treat the wound, and do not apply anything constricting, because it harms nerves and makes them retract;
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and put nothing cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuance is with the brain, which is the highest member;
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	but let the medicine be warm, as with warm water washed chalk, and mixed with rose oil, and cuce washed also in warm water, and other minerals of the same kind, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then cut and bind it, then treat it until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and there is pus and swelling, then pierce them higher up;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if an artery is cut, and there is bleeding, then ligature it, and stop it, and cauterize it if necessary;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the windpipe, and the passageway for food is blocked, then cut open the neck above the Adam's Apple, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape;
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then hold it gently, and leave it for several days, then treat with ointments that promote healing until it is healed;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has left an impression on the bone, then treat it thus:
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and if there are bone fragments, remove them all if you can, and those that you cannot reach, leave them until the wound suppurates, is cleaned out, and the passage is cleared;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, apply the powder I have described above.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have said in that chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a deep wound from a lance or knife, and the patient is not vomiting wind, then:
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	you will know that the wound is mortal;et si tu ves que la chair est verte ou noire, ou qu’il y ait sanguine en la chair
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and if the wound is not deep and is fresh with all its blood, then do not apply the powder at first, nor ligature it for fear of the blood clottings breaking loose, returning to the heart, and killing the patient;et si li sang ne demort pas em parfond, et n’est pas venimeux, et la chair n’est noire ne verte, et le sang n’y est, si n’a grant dolor, si le laisse au repos et a leu de sang qui vienne, et le guarisira;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	but I apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	and if you don't have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to draw out moisture, and let the patient sleep with their head on the wound for three, four or more days;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	and if there is no spasming, nor trembling of the heart, nor strangulation of the throat;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see these good signs, you will know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Heal it then with poultices and other remedies until it is healed;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	and if it cannot heal, and there is still discharge, then you will know that there is a fistula;
si la cure si com on doit.	treat it then as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife, and it is superficial, or deep, or in the back, then treat it as described above;
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	if it is large, with stitching;
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has torn away pieces, then the wound, and the bones are displaced if they are dislocated;
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not dislocated, then let the wound fester, so as to lessen the extractions;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds in other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	from a rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	Breaking of the belly occurs in large, medium and small ways;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	of the great wound sometimes the intestines, or the nerves of the intestines, by which the entry of air;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	and stitching is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one, because one puts the intestines back in more with pins, if they are not put back gently from hot to cold;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	because the intestines swell as soon as they feel the cold, they contract more at their tips, and due to this, the wound heals better, so one must reset the intestines to their place, rather than the others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And you should know that there are three types of hernia in the abdomen:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	The two common hernias occur in the abdominal wall, and the hernias of other wounds in the body, and there are two other types of hernia that are specific to certain wounds.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	Nevertheless, they are more common with abdominal walls, and I will describe each one and make it clear.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and a little bit of intestine has come out, and it can be easily put back in, then it is one of two ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	either because the wound is small, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.Et a ceste costure covient il que tu mues les intestins a son lieu et qu’il ne se demourent en l’enduit ou li plaie est fait.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, heat it in such a way:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	wet a sponge or a soft cloth in warm water only, or cook it in squint water and cypress and spike and rose until the swelling is relieved;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and sometimes this wine is restraining, and it is used alone to reduce swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the swelling leaving, then moisten the intestine with water or old wine in which are cooked mallows and marjoram, for by this the entrance is made easier for a little while.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a small cut in the instrument with which they cut hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	and the first cure is made to the wound, from which one must not cut without great necessity;si li taille est saine de l’entree sus la plaie, et quonque ne muoie, si convien la curiere dousement a l’enfeure que
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this is the instrument to split it with:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if you cut inside at an angle and do not go straight through, and look here at the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, then put them back according to their natural shape in their proper place, if you have the power, for this is better.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then you must have the patient lie on his back with his legs higher than his head:
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and if it is in the lower part of the belly, then put the head and feet higher than the lower parts, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two sides, then have the patient turn onto that side so that the wounded part is higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus you must conduct yourself with large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	With small wounds, take what you have ready, then grip with your fingers the edges of the wound all around, and bring them together;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	and this is the common way of stitching, and it is that you take a needle or more, according to the width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound two threads' worth of space, and thread a needle with a strong thread through it;
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	and pierce the two sides of the skin with the two sides of the sutures, which is underneath the skin inside, so that you make it pierce from that part, and tie the two ends of the sutures together;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	then draw the thread through twice around the needle from both sides, then bring the two sides of the wound together evenly, and then leave two threads' worth of space, and thread another needle;et ainsi tu faices II ou IIII couppes selonc la quantiteit de la plaie.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	and tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not cease to do so according to your need for needles, until the entire wound is bound;et si il advient qu’il ne se peust restrainer avec les aguilles, mais aine qu’on le poisse destrer, il covient que l’on le destreive, et que l’on lie les chiés dou cuir entor la plaie selonc la maniere
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	let the needles be medium-sized, both fine and thick, for fine needles cut through all flesh, and very thick ones cannot enter well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	because of this they should be medium-sized.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and one must not push the needles too deep into the flesh and through the skin so that they do not cut and open the wound before the wound is closed.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	then one should cover the heads of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient when he sleeps, and put tents or bandages over the heads of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is closed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	and this method of stitching with needles is most suitable for small wounds, because only one or two needles are needed.Et quant li malaide a grant plaie, si convient qu’il soit costé a la manière de l’esguile; et puis li covient mettre le drapelz ou la tente sus li pi
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second stitch is common and is where you bring together the two ends of the skin and the two ends of the הסית (syt, a type of cloth) with a needle and strong thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	And when you have pierced all four ends together, bring the needle back to the place where you started, in the way that one sews a dress.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	And space each stitch with the thickness of a little finger.
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	This stitch is good for a man, and I sewed up a wound that a man had on his belly, which was cut with a knife, and the wound was more than a palm wide, and the intestines were exposed for more than two palms in width, and the wound was in the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought him back to health after his intestine had been outside for 24 hours, and the wound was sewn up for 15 days, and I treated it, and he recovered.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And they thought he would die, and it was a miracle:
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not treat him with ointment, because I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and apply cotton wool soaked in honey to the wound twice a day, and wash it with water until it is healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Or I shall tell thee of two proper ways of suturing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle and insert it in the wound from the outside just until it touches the interior;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	when it has pierced the skin straight through, then hold the eye of the needle where it entered and pull it through from the inside out until it emerges on the outside;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and the technique of this suturing is that you sew as the furriers sew furs, leaving some skin on one side and taking some from the other, so that the sutures are completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second method of suturing which Galen describes correctly, is done as some people join two pieces of skin naturally and apply one edge of the wound to the other, thus:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	stick a needle or needle tip, and pierce that area only, and leave the two ears of the syringe;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	then turn the needle and pierce from the outside towards the inside, to the two ears of the syringe; and draw blood until it flows freely through both ears.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then pierce one and then the other from the outside towards the inside, in two other ears of the syringe that are on the opposite side; and draw blood until it flows freely through both ears.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the usual method of suturing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Galen says this word, and some testify to it, that one should sew the belly with two needles, with thread in each; and when you have sewed both sides of the wound, pass the needle through from one side to the other, and then back again, so that the thread lies across the middle of the wound.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one should push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew sores; and when you have sewed both sides of the wound, pass the needle through from one side to the other, and then back again, so that the thread lies across the middle of the wound.and when you have sewed both sides of
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	and know that when the rupture is in the belly, then the cure is more difficult than from other places in the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and it is so that when you find the fresh wound full of blood, as long as the wound has not bled, then put back the intestine and the gut;
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	then put on healing powder, and if the wound has bled, then put on any suitable ointment until the wound heals over;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and tie the thread, and sew the lips of the wound, and the muscle;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound as the others, until it is healed;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and if you have no medicine, then put on old cotton, and change it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you need no other medicine in many situations where the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and if you doubt that the wound will affect the principal members, then you should wet a light woolen cloth in tempered oil or rose oil, and place it around the wounds, and under the armpits;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	and if there is pain or a swelling in the bowels, which often happens, then cleanse with a clyster of tepid black wine, especially if the swelling reaches the intestines;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and pierce it from within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines, which are called 'young', cannot heal when they are injured, and this is due to the thinness of the veins through which they run, and the subtlety of the entire body, and their close connection to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the membrane jumps out of the wound, then put it back in as the intestine, while it is still fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	and if it is old and become green or black, then you must tie off the area that is black so that bleeding vessels don't come, for there are veins and arteries there;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	then grasp what is between the ligaments, and place both heads dangling from the bottom part of the wound to loosen the extraction when the sutures are cut, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	of the route of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestines protrude and the wound is small, it can sometimes be healed in some people, because I saw a man who was stabbed in the belly;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became a fistula, and from it came excrement and flatulence;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied treatment according to what I knew, and did not cease to treat him gently until he was healed and the wound closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw it healing, I feared that the man had discomfort in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	but there was no discomfort, and he stayed in good condition, eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and some experimenters say that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it should be bound up in such a way:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	take a piece of sheep's testicle, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the testicle is unfurled, place it over both lips so that it holds them shut.
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	Then tie the testicle to the head, and it will stay in place so that it cannot be dislodged. Then put another testicle after it in the same way until the wound is completely bound up.
et cout la plaie.	And then dress the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	If they are wounds in the intestines, and no harm comes to the patient, then one can ligate the intestines with a fine thread cut from an animal's intestine, in such a way:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	take the end of this intestine thread which is very thin, and then tie to the end of this fine linen thread, put the thread through a needle, and sew up the intestines, and reset it in its proper place.Car il doit estre liiez l’intestine par le fil de lin, et li chief liier a l’intestine d’une beste si qu’il ne se puet desliier;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this method of sewing up the perineum is not appropriate except according to the way of faith and hope.
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the grave intestinal diseases, then there is no remedy or healing except with subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it wakes up, is universally called a "fistula", and especially when it is hooded and bowed in.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And a fistula is according to the verdant nodulation of a hard and white tumor, where one does not feel pain, and it is as common as the feather of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes it is in a clear bowels, and sometimes dense;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes small, and sometimes enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, it is not due to one of the VIII causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	that is, by the smallness of blood or body;
ou por sa malice;	or for his malice;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is a hard lump within it, and upon the lips, which prevents the growth of hair;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or because he has too much bowels;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or because the skin is shrivelled and the matter within is of poor quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or because the medicine is not good for the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because the putrefaction is of a pestilential nature;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or because the digestion in the region is tardy and slow, and health is delayed, and there is swelling by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	or because there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments with medicine in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now I will tell you about the treatment for a fistula that is done with the hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	You should know that fistulas occur throughout the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	because they can come from large veins, or arteries, or nerves, or the eye, or the intestine, or the bladder, or any part of the sides, or the spine in the back, or any joint in the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it affects the principal part of the limb, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all fistulas that are in this way are very painful to heal, and there is nothing but hard work and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if there is any fistula that does not reach the point I have described, and you are confident in the cure, and you see it working, then take a tent of iron or bronze, if the fistula is straight, and pierce it;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	and if the fistula is crooked, then use a thin tent of lead, because lead bends around the curvature;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	and if the fistula has several openings and you cannot pierce it with tents, then cleanse it by cauterizing one of the openings, because moisture travels from one opening to another;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	then pierce it as hard as you can, so that you may discover whether there is a bone or nerve, and whether it is deep, and ask the patient about their pain when you press your hand, and where they feel it;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and when you know the true location of it, and whether it is near a joint or nerve or artery or vein, or in any of the places I have told you, then cut according to what I have instructed, and remove the diseased flesh and rotten bones within.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	then treat the wound until it heals; and if the fistula is deep and in a good location, you should cut it deeply, as much as you can, then place moist tents in medicinal vinegar, and insert them into the fistula up to its head, so that the medicine corrodes the excess matter remaining at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then apply healing ointments to the healthy flesh until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if it is not healed by this method, then cauterize it as we have said; and if the bone is diseased from the fistula, cut it out.et s’il est a la jointure ou nerf ou artere, si le coupe et li ostes la fautreure, et si li os est corrompus, si le cope, et tu le ramettes s’il n’
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerve does not trouble your principal limbs, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the bone is exposed and there is decay and blackness in it, then treat it with king's ointment until the decay is all removed, then heal it with healing things;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	and if it does not heal and returns as before, know that you have not gone to the source:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	if you uncover it and go to the bottom, and remove all the decay, then restore the place;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is thus healed, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the decay is too deep for you to reach it;si le memre est trois ou quare disloquez, se il s’en peut aler, si covient que on le fasse aler et que il rent a
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if the limb is dislocated three or four times, if it can be moved, then it should be moved and return to its natural position without any other artifice;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there is a small rotten bone, and you can pull it out with tweezers, then extract it with the instrument suitable for this purpose, and if there are many bones, pull them all out without leaving any behind.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	and if moisture is causing the dislocation, and there is no error or fear, then cut and release the moisture and the flesh, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then put something on the wound that promotes pus, and let it fester around the bones, and then they will be more easily removed.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	And if it is a large bone, such as in the leg or thigh, then clean only the corruption until all the blackness is removed, and then dress the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	And if there is a large part of it that is rotten, and it comes to the marrow of the bone:
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it needs to be bandaged and wrapped all the way up to the腐敗, and then treated until it is healed.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	and I will tell you about a fistula that happened in a man's leg, so that you can take example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	He was a young man of about 30 years old, who had pain in his leg due to a cause that came from inside the body, so that the matter came out through the leg, and it was swollen with a large abscess, and he did not know what to do to open it;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	but the doctors worked so much on it that the abscess opened and a lot of matter came out, and it became a fistula, and many openings came from which all the pus and moisture of the body flowed out;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and many doctors treated him for 2 years, and there was no improvement in his condition, so I was called to see his leg and the medicine with which he was being treated, and I saw that which flowed out through the openings caused great harm to the body;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and the bodies of the young men became red, and had a citron colour.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these openings, and then searched all the openings, and found that one came against another all the way down the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I hurried then, and probed one of the openings until I exposed a portion of the bone, and found it rotten and piercing through, with the corruption going right to the bone inside;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I probed what appeared to be of the rotten bone, and believed there was no other corruption except that which I removed;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and began to dress the wound with strong medicines for a long time, but it would not heal;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and then I began again, and exposed the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and probed it, and then removed it, and laboured to heal the place;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	but I could not, for whenever I probed around a palm of the bone, and drew it out as far as its root, then I restored it with medicines;et je vis bien que ne demoureroit ains qu’il ne fist l’un de ces deux: ou il morroient par la corruption qu’il aveit en son corps, ou
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and he was cured and healed quickly, and the procedure did not need to be repeated except for the weakness of the patient who could not endure it, and because of the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the bloodletting, he often bled profusely, but he was completely healed, and in the bone a hard lump grew, and he had a good disposition and no harm or contrary effect anywhere, neither lying nor moving.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, then it should be treated in this way:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	take a string and tie it to the head of the bone that is open, and have someone pull it upwards;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and tie another thicker string of linen to the first string, and tie it around the flesh above the bone, and pull on the head, so that you draw up the corrupted flesh from below, and uncover the flesh above where you want to operate, so that the string does not cut the flesh;
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and place a hot coal or a small tablet under the bone to cover the corrupted flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and one must wait as long as one can see and feel the corruption, and wait again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is rotten and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then cut away all the flesh;
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	then put embers underneath, and then feel from one part of the corruption to the other, and the sore will be drawn towards the embers, as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, cut away the rotten joint, and feel the bone where it contains from the other side;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is along two joints, there is no other remedy but to cut them away;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	and if the corruption is in the knuckle of the hand or foot, it is a serious matter, but nevertheless you must investigate the corrosion and how it appears to you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and cleanse it in every way you can, but be careful not to damage the vein or nerve.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and know that the knives and saws for cutting bones are many, according to the position of the bones, their appearance, thickness, thinness, size, and hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and therefore one must prepare different tools for each type of operation.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and know that the job will show you the tool you need according to your knowledge of this art and the testimony of the nature of the diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if you think about the tool you need according to what is appropriate for it.
dou feu	fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The shoulders may dislocate due to an internal or external cause;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	and when you have treated that corrosion with medicine, and it does not help, then you must cover that limb up to the place where the corrosion is, so that the patient escapes either death or the greater evil of losing the limb.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	and the signs are that the limb becomes black as if it were burnt by fire, and then after the blackness, the rot spreads from limb to limb, and affects the whole body;
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	if it is from a bite, and if it is from the sting of some venomous creature, such as a sea scorpion, adder, or similar, if the rot is on the head, then cut off the hand, and do not give it any time to spread to the arm.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it reaches the hand, then cut at the joint so that the rot does not spread to the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	and if it reaches the arm, then cut at the elbow;si elle viegne au coude, si la cope a la jointe de l’elbow
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and if it passes the elbow, that is death, and there is no remedy other than to cut off the quantity according to its strength;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	and do the same when the corrosion comes to the foot:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	if it comes in the first joint, then dislocate the cup after the other joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes to the foot, then dislocate all of the foot;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it rises in the leg, then dislocate at the knee joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to kill the patient with a blow;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and the method of dislocating a limb is to tie it above and below, and extend one assistant's hand downward from the lower ligature, and another assistant's hand upward from the upper ligature, and you loosen the flesh between the two ligatures by a span, so that the bone is exposed;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	then dislocate it and place a piece of linen on each side so that the bone does not touch the healthy spot, and cause another injury or abscess to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if blood flow occurs when you operate, cauterize the site directly or apply some restraining powders.
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the wounded member with an appropriate ligature and treat it until it is healed.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	And I will tell you what happened to a man in a dream:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	He had a dark discoloration that looked like a burn, and this corrosion began at the bottom of his big toe, spreading to cover the entire foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	And when the man saw the corrosion, he covered it with copper, and it was healed.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	Long after, the corrosion returned on his finger, and he came to me, and I applied some counter-irritant remedies after cleaning the body, but could not stop the corrosion;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	He wanted me to cover his hand, but I refused because I had no hope that the treatment would work.And he said: "If you do not want to treat it with counter-irritants, then cut off my hand." And I said to him: "If you were a king's son, I
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and I doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die, for man's strength was weak.
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	And they all despaired and returned to their land, and had their hand bound, and were healed.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have not found anything wrong with this except that one should not do it to someone else if they need it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Sometimes an abscess forms in a fleshy part, and remains so long that it causes a great gathering of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then they rupture and discharge, and the place remains hollow like a vessel;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and the skin above is as thin as a separated cloth, and does not reach the bone or nerve, and such a disease is called 'healthy', and not a 'fistula'.
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so long that it reaches to the bone, it is called a "fistula".
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the cautery should be applied all around the wound, especially when it is deep, just like a bandage.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and do not worry about causing harm.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you are afraid that the skin will burn, and the corruption is not in depth, and the skin is thick, then cauterize it thus:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	examine if the breast is swollen and the nipple has an offensive odor, then treat it with an Egyptian medicine made thus:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	take asafoetida, oil, and litharge, in equal amounts, and put the mixture in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and then take some of this according to your need, and they make it in water and honey, and they administer it as an enema to the breast, and they constrict the opening;
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and let the medicine remain for two hours, then extract it by squeezing;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this many times until the breasts are relieved and the poultice removed;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	and sometimes they are enema with water of ashes when this medicine is not available, and it is that you burn vine wood to ashes, and pour water on it, then strain the liquid and use it as an enema until you know that the breasts are relieved;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	and if the patient cannot bear it, or the Egyptian medicine, nor the water of ashes, then they are enema with water and honey in which there is some powdered quicklime;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	or cleanse it with honey and wine, for honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and wine makes the wound breathe.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and when you have done this and trust that the wound is clean, then cleanse it with that which makes bowels move within him, and it is what you prepare poultice of diafinit, and mix it with rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or cleanse it with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken of the properties in the section on ointments.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	and if the wound of the breast is small and the pipe of the enema cannot enter it, then widen it a little with an iron, and put in it a tent made of egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment, as much as can be inserted.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the wound is too large, then cut and leave only the place where the enema can enter, and if the orifice that vomits bowels is above, then cut it below, where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bow is drawn fully, do not leave an arrow to lodge there.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	if you cannot cover the breast from below as you wish, then prepare in such a way that the bow points to the lowest place it can reach. For when the bow is drawn fully, do not leave an arrow to lodge there.
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	let the bow move gently downward, and let nothing of the bow remain.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	take consoliding remedies to apply over the wound, and they must be placed over the linen bandage that covers all the breast;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	then press firmly on the opening of the breast, making the hole as wide as the first one, then apply a suet ointment over the other bandage according to the size of the wound, and place it over the wound to ease the bow, without removing the large bandage for several days.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and that which is on the nipple, remove often to take out the bow, and know what flows from the bow, whether it is venom or little or enough, or digestive, or undigested;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been applied in such a way and you see the nature that rises on the nipple, then you know that the milk is coming out, and approach the saints;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	and then untie it in the morning, or at noon, and when you untie the wound, change the other bandage, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast milk flows in an unripe state after several days, know that the breast will not produce milk.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons spread over a long time, you should not despair of health, for health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are men whose wounds heal slowly with pus in their wounds, and those who heal quickly in the contrary way;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if undigested milk flows from the breast after many days, know that the milk is not coming out;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if the breast is slow to heal and is distant, then apply dry medicines that are moist in substance but dry in virtue, like an ointment that is diaphanous, for it contains a large amount of vitriol, and this is the final medicine.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take diaphanous ointment, and make it with rose oil, and equal rose wine in substance;
puis le confit et en use;	then cook it and use it;
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	and with the same make honey candy, when diaphanous ointment is not available, or take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them into powder over the honey while it is on the fire;
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and then use this to glue a bandage onto the breast, and sometimes administer aristologus root, which is like flour made from vetches and centaury;
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	and use simple remedies or compounds:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	grind them to powder, add the honey I mentioned earlier, and use it.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	And if the wound is deep and not healed by this treatment, then you will know that the corruption goes deep, causing impressions in the bones, or hard spots in the limbs or internal organs.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the wound is a fistula, as we have said earlier.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Paresis is an abscess that arises underneath the fingernail or toenail, or occasionally in other places. It can also arise in the armpit, or the groin, or the stomach, or between the buttocks, or on the back, or behind the ears, or anywhere else.
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	And when it becomes infected and is left untreated, then an abscess forms, and it runs and oozes pus as long as the root of the nail is affected, and sometimes it affects the entire nail. This can also happen to a toe or any other finger. The same treatment should be applied to all such cases.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and comes the corrosion to the bone, so that it causes a fetid pain, and the shoulder is made broad on both sides, and the color is yellow.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have described in the previous section, and the treatment does not help, then you should cut away all the excess tissue that is hanging from the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	Cauteries are of great help if the bone is healthy, and the fingernail is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and if the nail pushes against the flesh and begins to grow out, and the blister, then you must put the thread under the nail pushing the flesh out, and pull it up, and gently and subtly cut off that flesh, and put on the rest of the flesh burning and corrosive medicines to remove everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure the wound until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it out and draw it out, because as long as the corrupt bone remains, it will not heal;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if you see the shoulder becoming corrupted, cut it out in the neck as previously described, then cure it until it is healed;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is wild, and bitten, and it feels great pain, then you must treat it first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	then cut the nail of the thumb with an agaric, cutting diagonally across the top, and be careful that the cutter does not reach the flesh underneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, put something on it to soothe it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of a deaf person's hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two joints that grow in some people's hands by chance are sometimes all flesh, and sometimes they have bones, and sometimes nails; and some grow from the root of the joint, and the growth is on some fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	Nails which grow from the top of the finger do not move, but those that grow at the joint of the finger may move.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The cutting of one who is fleshy should be done thus:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cut it at its root with a broad agaric.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	The one that grows at the root of the joint is difficult to treat:
si te tien dou coper.	if you hold it still.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For those who are born in the back of the jaw, you should first scrape the round flesh to the bone, then scrape the bone with an appropriate needle, then heal it until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	Joints can be united by birth, or by the joining of a wound, or by a burn, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	You must cut this suture, so that the fingers grow according to their natural shape;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then place between two tents or moistened sheets in rose oil, so that they do not adhere.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you put between two thin pieces of wood, until the glue dries, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If adhesion occurs to one of his hands with the palm, correct that adhesion as it should be.
des vils	of the evil
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Veins are large, enveloped vessels filled with melancholy superfluities that come from various parts of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and this happens more often in legs for those who walk and work and carry things, rather than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should administer to him some purgative medicine, and then the basil drink.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	There are two types of cautery:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	one is done with fire, drawing out the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other way is to lift the vein and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The incision is done like this:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	first, raise the leg with very hot water until the large veins are dilated, then straighen the leg from above the thigh to just below the knee;
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then open the vein in place I, or II, or III, with a wide cut, then press and draw out the black blood into your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the illness can bear;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then cleanse it, and instruct him to anoint himself with black pitch;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and repeat the bloodletting and bleeding when the veins are full, which benefits the illness.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The treatments for this illness are as follows:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	examine the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then put it in the bath, and pour hot water on the leg until it turns red and opens the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you do not have a bath, heat it by the fire, and then open the vein from the long side of the knee to the top of the ankle, or in the part below the ankle;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then open the skin at the base of the fingernail, and scorch the vein on both sides until it appears when you feel for it.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and you will see it red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white cord;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	then tie off the vein underneath, so that it is raised up from the skin, and then cut it at the base, then clamp it in another place above in two places;
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then scorch the skin above the vein until it appears, then lift it up to the nail, just as you did before, and cut it at another nail, just as you did before;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	then make another cut, or several if you need to, then lift it up and cut it at the toe, then pull and lift up to the second cut;
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then draw it out from cut to cut, until it comes all the way out, then tie it off;
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and if you cannot milk and raise it, then put a needle on a very strong double thread, tie it and milk it, put it under the udder, and turn your hand from side to side until it comes out.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and beware that she does not kick, for if she kicks, you cannot milk or raise her, and harm comes to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	And when you have finished milking, put on the wound wool soaked in wine and rose oil;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it until it heals.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the vein is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it twistedly, but do not kick it;
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and milk it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron with which one kicks the vein is curved, and it does not cut, so that it does not open the vein;
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and is of a thick curvature because if it were thin, it would pierce the vein but let it be thick as we have said and here is the form.
de la voinne civile	of a civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is found in legs, in hot parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in dry land where there is no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	and by chance it grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens with warts that grow underneath the skin, just as snakes and worms do, growing between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	If the signs of the beginning of this wound are that a great inflammation comes in the leg, then the location changes, and the wound begins to come out, just as a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the shoulder opens, you must wrap around it a piece of plaster three and a half inches to four inches wide, and tie it, leaving the plaster hanging down on the leg, and every time it dislocates, wrap it around the plaster and the wound.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	And if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap around the remaining plaster, but do not cover its root at all until it is completely healed.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cut it, it will enter the flesh and cause an abscess and pus in that spot, and a serious illness.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	Because of this, it should be treated little by little until the very end, so that nothing remains in the body.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	And sometimes this vein, when treated from the palm of the hand, is ten or twenty inches long, and a man came to me once whose was twenty inches long. And when you cut it, it causes a stream or gush, and pierces right through to the bottom so that everything flows out.
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And the matter inside is emptied, and medicine-impregnated dressings are applied for a few days to cause pus to form, then it is treated like an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And sometimes this vein has many branches, especially when it opens at the joints of the foot or ankle, and there are many gushes, and from them springs blood.
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Treat it then as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that live between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is called "cattle disease" in our land, because it often affects oxen. It is caused by a small worm that lives between the skin and flesh, moving throughout the body, ascending and descending, until it bursts through the skin where it goes, and escapes.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	It is also accompanied by the emergence of humors, like worms, serpants, roundworms, and other parasites in the belly.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	Its malice is feared because when it moves through the body and reaches the head, it can enter and destroy the eye.
et ceu avient maintes fois.	This happens often.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it moving and wriggling, one cannot help but feel revulsion.
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	Therefore, you must tie the area above and below tightly with a strong string, then cut it out and if the worm is deep in the flesh and you cannot extract it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greater harm he does, as we have said, is that he runs to the eye.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming near the eye, grab under his chin firmly, then lift up and pull out.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and one must use the treatment for purifying the body with dissolveing medicines to remove bad humors and to guard against constipating foods.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of pain that comes from flatulence
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This disease is called "vomiting" in our language, and it is a pain that comes to various limbs and then moves from limb to limb;
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and I saw what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm;
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and soon after, I saw it rise to her shoulder as fast as anything, as quick as silver when it moves from place to place. It moved rapidly and looked like a worm. ;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	the pain leaves that spot, and goes to the shoulder, and then a little later runs through the whole body, until it reaches the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then she began to turn around the body, just as I saw her.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was very surprised how it moved from limb to limb like that, because I had never seen this disease progress in that way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	Nevertheless, I have seen many whose pain has moved from one place to another, but I have not seen it in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and I thought that it was because women's bodies are dry and their veins uncovered, and that this caused the wind to be constrained in them;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and they do not appear according to this reason in those who are constipated, and who have moist bodies and relaxed veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you see this disease being cured, and the patient feels the pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then open up above and below, and then press gently until the wind is forced out of its place;
et cauterize le leu;	and cauterize the area;
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	and if you do not see it yourself, then have the person who performs enemas, as with foul-smelling pills, and serapium pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearance and according to the part of the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity of their appearance is such that some have large points, some small, some sharp, and some smooth;
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and some have two angles, and some have tongues, and some have pieces;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	and those that break in a member do so in two ways:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	or in a principal member it breaks, as with brain, heart, liver, lung, kidney, intestines, bladder, and similar members.Or il chiet en membre de la chair, si com en osse, en tendins, en ligamenz, en nervoz, en veines, en arteries, et en toute l’autre chair qui
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it therefore breaks in any of these members, and the signs of death that I will tell you about appear:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	Then you must be wary of extracting this arrow, for death often follows such a course;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	And if this evil sign is not apparent to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then pull it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of the brain is when the arrow pierces and penetrates the bone, and the syphilis emerges from above the brain, and there is scotomata, and an odor, and a discharge, and redness, and inflammation of the tongue, and spasms, and a disturbance of the mind, and vomiting of blood;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and perhaps it emerges from the nose or ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps they lose their speech and voice;et li sains lours le corps et li membres et le vis,
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and the healthy person feels pain in the body and members and face, and from the wound emerges white moisture resembling pus, and also like a bruise on meat;et si li sains se levent, il die qu’il a grant mal, et si li saige bevet,
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if this sign appears, keep to the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is inside.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The signs of an arrow wound when it hits the body are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck in a hard object, not hollow;
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and sometimes the arrow wound goes silent like the pulse, and there is dark blood, and coldness and cold sweat, and syncope:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	then know without a doubt that death approaches.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow that never leaves the lung is that without pain foam comes from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes heavily and seeks the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrow hits the bottom of the foot, it is between the small bones;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and there is great pain and deep sighing;
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and all the limbs move from the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrow hits the stomach, perhaps something undigested will jump out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow hits the belly, and nothing comes out of the bowel but feces, then there is no hope for a cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrow hits the bladder, and the urine comes out in a spray and there is leakage, and the patient feels great pain:
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	know that the wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and armpit and spine of the back and hip and thigh and leg, and similar limbs, are safe according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or artery and is not venomous, as I will tell you so that you can do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	There was a man who got an arrow in his eye socket at the root of the nose:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I probed it and pulled it out from under the fat of the ear, and he was healed without a scar.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And I pulled out an arrow that had pierced the fatty tissue under his eye and was lodged beneath the eyelid; the arrow was stuck with its tip pointing towards the bridge of the nose, and it was as long as a Turkish archer's arrow, with a thin shaft and no feathered fletching. It had pierced through without any sign of blood or pus.
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	The patient healed without any complications.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	I pulled an arrow out of the throat of a Christian man; it was an Arabic arrow with feathered fletching:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I cut away the barbs and carefully extracted it, and the Christian man healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And brought a arrow to a man who had it lodged in his chest or belly, and thought he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and after thirty days had passed, his condition did not improve;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut into the arrow, and extracted it, and he had no bad reaction.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a man who has an arrow lodged in his back, and the wound is sutured over;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and the arrow remains inside him, and his natural functions do not change, nor does he experience any discomfort in any of his natural processes.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And you see another man who has an arrow lodged in his face, and the wound is sutured over;Et demora li saiette lor dedens, si com je vos di, et ne fu nulz dous de ses oevres naturels changiez
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	And the arrow remains inside them, as I have told you, and none of their natural functions are changed, and they remain without
et mout d’autres semblans.	and many others.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And there was a certain arrow shot at the king, a prince of the realm, that had pierced his eye and was slightly inclined towards the right side;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the arrow was fully embedded.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called to attend to him after three days had passed.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I examined it carefully and couldn't feel anything;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	but he felt a piercing pain under his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was from the point of the arrow. I applied a soothing and digestive poultice to the area to reduce swelling;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and I saw the head of the arrow. Je mis sus lo leu de la saiette poudre de fer et de plomb, et
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I applied powder of iron and lead to the head of the arrow, and reapplied the poultice daily. The wound healed, but the patient felt the presence of the arrow in his eye for a long time;
et il le me dist.	and he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I put corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it was open and I probed it and felt the head of the arrow which was embedded there.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	Then I applied this medicine to the wound until the head of the arrow became visible;
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and it healed well within four months. Then I enlarged the wound with forceps and could not extract the arrow;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	so I continued to manipulate it with instruments until one day, according to what is written in this chapter, I drew it out and healed the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And those who have knowledge of such things judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	so I restored it and the wound was healed completely.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	Here I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your care on what I do not say, for books cannot include everything.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	but the wise masters compare on very little great things, and on what they are present and lacking, they find new works and new tools, to the descent of strange things that come in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows grow in the members where they are stuck according to two ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or through the place where they enter, or through another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which goes out through where it entered is an arrow entering into their muscles, and sometimes goes out now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not go out now, then leave it so that the flesh around it becomes rotten and the outlet is relieved;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, then leave it like that for a few days, and move it every day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And then it leaps, and if it does not leap, then pierce all around with a very thin stick until the orifice widens, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the head, and penetrates one of the brain's ventricles, and some of the aforesaid accidents manifest in the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	do not pull it out, but leave it as long as several days, for if the arrow reaches the brain, that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is lodged only in the bone and does not reach the brain, and the patient remains for several days without any bad symptoms, then treat it by extraction.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is lodged very deeply and cannot be removed, then administer cauterization around it, as I have told you;
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal the wound until it is closed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow has been driven into the body so that it cannot be seen, then look for it throughout the body;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, then draw it to a suitable instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and if you cannot due to the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then open it as widely as the wound is large;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and pull out the arrow if you can, and if there are barbs on the arrow that hold it in place, then cut away the flesh where the barbs are located on both sides as far as you can, and then bend or twist the barbs of the arrow so that you can pull it out;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and be careful not to break the arrow as you pull it out more forcefully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot remove it in one go, then leave it until the flesh around it is swollen, and then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the flow of blood causes a problem, then refer to what we have said about curing in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	and beware of cutting into a nerve and opening a vein, and use every trick you know to pull out the arrow safely, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently;
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	and place the patient in the same position as when the arrow struck him, for that is the best help you can provide; and if you cannot do this, then place him according to the signs that show themselves.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another direction, or where something of it appears, or the skin is swollen in that spot where one can see or feel it clearly:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	cut above it, as high as the tweezers can reach, and then pull it out:
si saut fuer maintenant.	if it jumps out immediately.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is caught in the bone, then rotate your hand rapidly, so that it goes into the bone and widens the opening, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, then leave it and try pulling again until it comes out:et s’il est en haut ou en bas, et ne peut demourer en son lieu, et tu vois que il se remue, si le mets sus li foyez selonc le membre qu’il a la dis
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if it is high up or low down, and cannot stay in its place, and you see that it is moving, then reset the joint according to the limb that is affected by the dislocation:and if there is an
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if it is cut, and you see to administer bandaging, then let him administer the instrument chewed, so that the tip of the arrow enters the gum of the instrument;
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and then bite down, and if the arrow is chewed, let him bite down on the instrument with its tip entering in, to aid extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow has touched, then you must cut all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, then cure the wound as it should be.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow is cut or pierced in the mouth, belly, bladder, or side, and it is close by, and you can cover it up, then let him cover it up.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	And be careful to not cover the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then close the wound, if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and treat it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of tweezers used to treat arrows are similar to an owl's beak, and here is the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	There are many ways of doing this:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrowhead is like that of a bird's feather, to push against the tip of the arrow, just as it is shaped:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of tweezers to pull and to check if it is there:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common body veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	Of veins from which one heals there are 31, of which there are 16 in the head, namely:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	II. Veins that are behind the ears, called "two herbech
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the II arteries that are in II temples apparent;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and two veins that are in the eyelids, which are called "aspirations".
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is in the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is at the top of the nose;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two windpipes which are in the neck;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are above the lips, and these are the veins called "augerich";
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and two veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins which are commonly used for bleeding are five in each arm:the first vein is called  "superficial external", and it runs along the arm just below the skin, from
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the  "cephalica", which is on the left side of the chest, and common people call it the  "vein of the head";the second vein is called   "superficial internal", and it runs along the arm towards the palm, from
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	and the middle one is called    "fast", and it is composed of the   "cephalica" and the   "basillica", and common people call it the   "vein of the heart";the third vein is called    "basillica", and it runs along the arm towards the back of the hand, from
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and the basilic vein is located on the right side, and the lay people call it "wound of the belly", and it is situated above the bladder, and it is that one which opens clearly above the scrotum.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the salvatoria vein is the one between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches:
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the leg and in the foot there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	one is below the curve of the scrotum on the left side, and the second one is at the ankle on the right side;
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein called "nest", which is at the ankle of the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The bleeding from the veins that are behind the ears helps with old cataracts and with emigrine;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	and the qualities of the surgeon, as I told you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth;
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	then tighten the patient's neck with a rope, so that the two veins appear behind the ears, descending from the head;
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	hold it tightly at your waist, and where you feel the pulse under your finger, press inwards;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	then take the lance and pierce under the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein upwards, and cut both the skin and the vein well twice with the lance, and let blood flow until you see it;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then tighten and bind it, until it is healed;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already said about incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The healing of the two arteries that are in the two temples, it helps with old-age blindness and habituated dim vision, and to the body of the eyes, watery eyes.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the qualities of the healing agent are as I said:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	and that the patient holds his neck still, so that the two veins are clearly visible;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feels the pain in your chest, and then signs inwardly;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	then lightly press the vein near the top of your index finger, and insert the lance below, and press the vein upwards, and draw out the blood according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then release the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then place cotton on top;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and then let it heal, and leave it until it is healed;
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and we have spoken of their formation and extraction, at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The sores of the frontal vein are as valuable as the cephalic veins in old diseases of the face, and in emigration and redness;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and its qualities are such that the patient twists his neck so that the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument called "digging", of which this is the form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point on the vein, and press with your hand or something else, and let the blood issue according to the amount you want;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then loosen the neck of the patient, and ligate the vein so that it is healthy, sometimes with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	Nevertheless, the flames should not be too narrow;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	and he should heal crosswise, because the bone is close, and might break the flame when it is subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The healing of the two veins that are in the two eyelids, and also for eye-inflammation, redness, and diseases of the face.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And the nature of their healing is that the patient should twist his neck in some way, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then it heals, and the healing is through the tissue, a little way down from the long flame, a little wide, because there is no flesh there.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flames are subtle, perhaps they will break;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	Then make it bleed until you have enough blood, and then tie it up with a thread, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The healing of the vein in the nose is useful for nosebleeds and for sudden madness, and for diseases of the face, such as inflammation and redness that come to the face, and especially when it is chronic.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	and the quality of bleeding is that the patient tightens his neck, then pulls his nose to your left hand, and takes the subtle flame long, and inserts it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well there, and the blood will now begin to flow;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then ligature it for a night, because it is quickly restored;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and this is the shape of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	Bleeding from the two sinuses helps with strangulation of the windpipe, and at the beginning of hoarseness, and many illnesses, and impetigo, and scrofula, and herpes, and stomachaches;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of bleeding is that the patient tightens his neck from both sides, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	and the master is standing above the patient's head, and the patient is sitting on a chair, then cut the vein in the arm generously, then draw blood moderately, as needed.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	then tie off the other vein, then gently constrict the veins, so that the patient is not strangled.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and let it be until morning, so that the wound can heal.
de la sainie des leivres	of bleeding from the gums
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The bleeding of the veins in the lips helps with sores in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and splitting of the lips, and pain in the teeth and gums.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of the bleeding is to have the patient sit in front of you, and constrict his neck as I've said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	then turn the lip, and examine both veins, one on the right side and the other on the left; you can identify them because they are black, and because there are small black veins around them.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	Cut both of them, and if you don't recognize them, and you're in doubt, then cut the largest one on each side, and likewise do the same for the veins above and below, as it's the same procedure.Et li voinnes qu’a l’enfre, si les cope a la fin, car il y a en l’enfre pluseurs veines que ont poeur;
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of bleeding under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The bleeding of the veins that are under the tongue is helped by the bleeding of the cephalic vein, and it is in the constriction of the throat, and in the diseases of the eye, and in the diseases of the mouth.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the qualities of the bleeder are that the patient should hold their hands out in front of the sun, and stick out their tongue, and look down on each side for a black vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	so therefore bleed both, but do not go too deep, for under them are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the neck from which one commonly bleeds are bled in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	either with a large mirtin needle, or a thin olive-wood one as sharp as a needle, and it is called 'anesil';
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and they are large and thin according to the width and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame of myrtle is highly renowned, and it is wide as you can see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open the veins smooth and full of clear blood, and those that contain thick and troubled blood;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and that is the shape of an olive-shaped flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more pointed and subtle, used for bleeding veins that are fine and contain subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps diseases that are under the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the bleeding to be stopped, and for the artery underneath to be cauterized.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he opens the artery, and a gushing of blood comes, then it must be stopped, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and the flame should not be gripped, but cut as if with a knife.And if the artery bleeds, and gushing blood comes, then it must be stopped, as I have said; and the flame should not
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilic does not open clearly, then you must dislocate it, and change to another;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	or you want some of them, or you heal in place of them the vein inside the arm:
elle apert manifestement;	it opens clearly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and the cautery flame extinguishes, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you want to find the site of the bleeding, you must therefore stretch out the arm, and touch the site until you feel the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the site with a cut, then tie up the arm, and cauterize the vein until the flame goes out;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	and be careful not to pierce the artery when you see the site swell, for that is the artery;
eschui la donques.	avoid it therefore.Car si tu le feris en l’artere,
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it gush out high like a child's urine, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is arterial blood:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	therefore hurry, and put your finger on it for a long time, then take your finger off if the wound stops bleeding, as often happens.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	bind up his arm and leave it, and do not move him who is sick.
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let him be afraid, and do not move him until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if the wound is not clotting and he is bleeding profusely while you are waiting for the medicine, then press hard on the artery until it stops.
et estainche li sans.	and stop the flow of blood.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	Take a piece of fir wood and split it, then take one half and tie it firmly in place until the next day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	If the wound is clotting, that's good;si li sans ne estainchie, querre une escorce d’alier
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if not, get a piece of alder wood and, as we said earlier, use powders to stop bleeding.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the bandages are not wrapped in various positions because of the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The bleeding of the vein in the middle helps that it draws blood from the head above and the body below, because it is composed of basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and the surgeon must be careful not to pierce too deeply and find the nerve, and it should swell and the wound be harmed, and perhaps it cannot heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	and this nerve opens in many people, but if it does not open in some because of its subtlety, then you must anoint it with the anesthetic;
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and avoid the nerve as much as you can.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if it has a vein between the two nerves, they cut it open.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The bleeding of the cephalic vein helps draw blood from the head and aids the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and one must open the vein with a flame from an olive branch or a myrtle twig, for it is the safest of all veins, since there are no nerves or arteries underneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Nevertheless, one must find the lightest vein, and if one misses the first time, one should try again;
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and sometimes veins swell up in certain people, when one misses the first time, but it does no harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the bleeding depends on your thought process.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you should know about opening veins is that it is not done merely to treat disease but also to prevent it from coming;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	and it can be performed in one of three veins that are in the arm:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	namely, the cephalic, the fast, and the basilic;li cephalique est li plus legiers de sainier, car il n’a pas
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should open the vein at the beginning of spring, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of digestion are apparent;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	and one must bleed him the first day or third, after two hours or three of the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The bleeding which is administered to the sick has no fixed time, but when there is need, day or night, at all times and at all hours.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and one must not bleed children until they are fourteen years old, nor women carrying a fetus beyond the fourth month until the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should the very elderly who have passed 60 years be bled.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when someone wants to be bled, in whatever way, he should first clean out the intestines with a gentle enema if he has retained a lot of feces so that the veins do not draw harmful excess fluids from the intestines into the principal limbs.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	Nor should one bleed those who are too bloated with food, nor those who are drunk, as long as it lasts, nor the hydropic.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and if one is sick after colic, vomiting, diarrhea, and excessive sexual intercourse with a woman, from exertion, from lack of sleep or fasting, and from all that depletes the body through arms or the body itself.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then secretly restore the humor if it is thin, through food and drink and medicine if you have the power to do so.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	then enter the bath if nothing else is helping, to restore the humor and to heal the wound around the navel, as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and avoid hard work, straining, and excess during that day, and similar things.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	and be calm and cheerful, and let the patient be higher than the person healing them, and rub their arm 2 or 3 times, then tighten the bandage above the wound gently, for if it is too tight or too loose, it cannot heal the wound.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then he rubs the area with his hands, until the veins swell, and they are felt;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	then moisten the needle with a little old oil, then place his finger from his left hand on that vein underneath the site he wants to cauterize, so that the vein does not burst and break when cauterized.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that flow like cords when cauterized, and others that are full of wind and so when the needle is placed on them and the cautery is applied, they draw back from the heat and cannot be opened, and thus one must be careful of these.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	And if he opens the vein, and the wound is too narrow, then one must be careful with this.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein opens on the first attempt, that is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	If not, then begin again a little lower down, or above the wound, if the swelling has subsided.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the swelling persists and the patient is in fear, then leave it for a day or two, and do not bind the arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	Perhaps hot abscesses will form;
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	do not enter into a bath, then begin the bleeding again if she wishes;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the wound is small, or the blood flows slowly and you doubt that enough blood will come out, then insert the fleam directly into the wound;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	and work a little gently, so that the swelling does not subside;
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	for it often happens, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the area swelling, do not begin the bleeding again, and place some linseed oil on it, for it lightens the body of blood, and is useful in that place where there is oil;
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and so administer the leech oil on each wound that you heal the veins to stop the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	and the same thing happens with triacle and bowels when they are placed in the wound;
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	if subtly the blood splits and escapes when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if a large abscess comes, which often happens, especially when it is not healed in the first place or when the opening of the vein is small, you should hurry and put a damp sponge in lukewarm water on the wound, and hold it there for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and you should do this after the blood flow from the wound stops, and if it remains in place for several days with some blackness or green, then it does no harm;Et s’il vient a la voix qu’il se remue ou qu’il se fende, si le faict mal.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see it, put on something made of aloe or myrrh mixed with medicinal juice, a poultice, or something similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And often there is an abscess and an appearance at the base of the penis:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	then put your hand on it, and if you find the area soft to the touch, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Therefore, avoid putting anything we have mentioned on it, because sometimes it comes from an artery;
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but let him dry-foment the area to harden it, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to its quantity and the strength of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red;
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	and if you see it thick, let it go until it is thinned out;
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is necessary for one who is full and bloated, and needs bloodletting, that they make him a larger wound, and let the flames be wide;
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and they should bleed him little and often, and they must bleed him by cutting across, not by pricking;
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this method of bleeding is safe from blood loss and nerve damage, and is better than bleeding from the long or wide vein.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And for one whose body needs bleeding, it is necessary to give them moist bread in pomegranate juice;
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	If he is hot-tempered, let him eat moist bread with pomegranate juice three or four times before bleeding. And if he is of a cold complexion, let him eat moist bread with syrup of rosewater, or with scented honey syrup mixed with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger and cardamom, and with fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints during bleeding, after losing a lot of blood, then he should drink warm broth and fragrant syrup, and use other things that we have mentioned in the chapter on syncope, for opening the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to empty his arm and bleed again, it is necessary, when he is weakened by a large bleed, that he bleeds little by little according to the amount of his continued strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wants to open their arm after the first bleeding, and they have a strong body, then heal for .7 hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to bleed elsewhere, then they should bleed on the second day or the third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For there is much blood within the body which has become heated, and brings on fever;
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	if one must draw out a great quantity, and widen the opening as far as it will stretch with the finger;
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	then you must examine all the conditions of healing, and put your hand on his pulse as he heals, so that death does not come to the place of the wound, and this often happens when the surgeon is negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and one must not, when you see to unbind the arm and make the blood issue out a second time, and the opening is closed, press directly on it;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	nor if it is crooked, that he extends his arm suddenly, for that would be bad;sies qu’en la seconde saingniee tu leuisses li bras pendre par un drape, et li pertus soit sus loing de
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	letting the arm hang by a cloth, and the opening be distant from the shoulder; but let it be until it heals the second time;et
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	or you point the flame to the tip of the vein until the frozen blood in the vein melts and flows out, then place a little salt mixed with water on it, and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is reduced.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to let blood a second time, then bleed in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The veins in the arm are healthy in the area of the vein in the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the way of bleeding is for the patient to put his hand in hot water until the vein is dilated;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then let him be bound up gently so that the vein appears well, then he should be bled from the middle, neither from the top nor the bottom;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and the cut should be wide, and bleeding should be done close to the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot come out, then put the hand back in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you have enough;
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is winter, do not put the hand back in hot water, for one puts their hand in warmer water in winter than in summer;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the bleeding from this vein is safer than from any other vein, for there are neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The bleeding to save the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it is done:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Hold the hand, and put in warm water, until the vein is swollen, as one sees it;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if it bleeds across, and you tie it from all sides, it will not hurt anything;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and do not go in too deep, for the nerves are stripped of flesh everywhere underneath, and then put the hand back in warm water if the blood is frozen in the wound, and it cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have stopped the bleeding as much as necessary, then put oil and silk on the wound to heal quickly, and do this for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The bleeding in the left hand is beneficial for the disease of the mouse, and do everything just as I told you about the right hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The salve of the sophia is good for all diseases that are under the body, such as diseases of the stomach, and retention of fluids, and diseases of the kidneys, and the buttocks and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the qualities of its bleeding are such that the patient puts his foot in warm water, and rubs on the vein until it bursts, and he applies a poultice to the joint of the foot;
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot they go very fast.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	treat it then with the broadest vein, or at the ankle, which is better.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you treat it above the foot, beware of the nerves underneath, and treat it across as well by cutting.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and let the fire be extinguished.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water, and let the vein bleed well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if it lacks the first time, do it again a little higher up, for the vein is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus do the same with the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The location of the sciatic vein is at the ankle bone, and its pulsation extends to the pain in the hip, when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And its quality is that the patient goes into the bath, and pulls up above the ankle three times by twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open;
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	and if it opens, then treat it in all ways you can, and across;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And it is better to cut it off because the skin is safe, and it is very relieved by hand.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not believe this, cut a vein in the leg that opens towards the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and be careful of the nerves.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	Let the blood flow as you wish, then loosen the bandage and put on cotton and tighten it;
ele est maintenant sanee.	It is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	Of cupping
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Cupping glasses are made from horn, or brass, or glass;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	And ventilation is done in two ways:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Either by cutting and drawing blood, or without cutting.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this ventilation which is without cutting, is according to two methods:ou par entremise de plave de vairre, ou d’arain;
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	Or it is through a glass plate, or brass; either it is with fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	and ventilation which is done by hitting and by bloodletting if it is done in XIV places of the body, one of which is all at the top of the head;
et li autres est emmi le col;	and others are among the neck;
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and two others on each side of the neck;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the ventouse under the chin;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the ventouse on both shoulders;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the ventouse above the hips;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the ventouses among the two arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the ventouses on both legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the ventouses on the two ankles;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and ventilation does not draw blood, except from small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and because of this it doesn't weaken him at all, as with bloodletting from a vein;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it must not be administered, neither by all fire nor by any heat, in any illness that comes from fullness, until the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if through necessity or habit it is necessary to bleed, then we should do so every hour at the beginning of the month, or at its end, and at intervals throughout each season.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	this is because there are some who have a heavy head when they need to bleed;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and some experience bloating and redness in their face, head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and some have a drop of blood in their mouth, and their tongue swells, and they bleed;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and there are some who dream, and see through the night blood and wounds and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially if it occurs during the night, we instruct them to drink a medicine after three hours.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	Bleeding from the nose helps with headaches … that come to the eyes, and should not be done after evacuating the whole body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and this bleeding is in the place of the headache, and should not be done by those of a cold complexion, or who have catarrh, because it does them great harm;Car s’il li est aprés le sangle, ou sur la coste sus li sangle, ou deduit par la coste sus li sangle, et que l’on le tienne si fort qu’il ne se mueve, et que il vienne de lor chief sang, et qu’il soit au costé sus
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and for this reason, the elderly should not use it, nor those who have serious diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often heal from it become oblate, and because of this, the cupping glasses should be placed a little lower down due to the risk of oblateness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	The wind-gazing in the neck is in line with the pulse of the head and the basilic, and for this reason it helps with tightness in the feet, and with splits in the gullet of the lung, and with constipation and bloating;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and one should not push it too hard, because if it is pressed too tightly, it harms the stomach and the heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The wind-gazing at the two sides of the neck helps with headaches, and eye pain and inflammation, and with strangulation, and with toothache, and is in line with the pulse of the basilic;
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and you should instruct the patient to express his hand when placing it, so that he does not constrict the artery and cause a rush of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The ventilators below the chin are good for mouth diseases, and gum decay, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth;
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and they are in place of bleeding from the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Ventilation of the armpits is good for a disease that comes from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The ventilators on the sides are as good as three veins in the arm, because they draw blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the bleeding person not to pierce too deeply, because the place is bare of flesh, and has veins and arteries underneath.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The cupping glass that is on the buttocks is good for hemorrhoids and illnesses underneath, and it should be large, and made of copper, so that it draws well;
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	and by chance, if it were delicate, it would break;
et i fai grans plaies.	and it makes large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The cupping glasses on the legs bleed very openly, because they draw blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains in the loins, and in the hips, and in the bladder, and restore the flow of urine;
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and are in place of two sutures, and of two ankles, and yet they weaken the body after long use, and cause paralysis in many ways.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The method of applying the cupping glass is to first place it empty, and suck gently, and apply it firmly, and move it evenly, and not stop doing this until you see the area red and swollen, and the redness of blood appearing;
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	then heat it, and re-apply the cupping glasses, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are some with such thin skin and clear pores;
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	one should only pierce once, and one should make wide wounds, and not too deep;
et suce legierement.	and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the vein is thick, one should pierce twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	the first time to open the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if the blood is very thick, then it must be struck a third time.
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	and when we want to draw out a little blood, we only need to strike once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we want a lot of blood, then we start again often;
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and if the blood is thick, then pierce it deeply, and the ends should be such that the skin is pierced suddenly, and it suits someone who has tough and hard skin, and who have narrow pores, that you grease the places of the ventouses with astringent and dissolving oil:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in the head, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in the liver, use watercress oil, or lily, or chamomile, or similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the swelling is large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsam, or of fennel, and similar oils.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if one is being bled from tender skin and large pores, then no oil should be used, but it should be washed after cupping with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or pumpkin water, or porcelain water, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have a lot of moisture should get up from garlic, or myrrh water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have large surpluses should drink old wine, or dry water, or a decoction of aniseed or chamomile, or similar;
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	and it is not good to bleed with cupping glasses before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for one or two hours;
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and he should not sleep after cupping, and it is good that he warms himself, both when he should be bled and when he is bled.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And beware if the person bleeding is choleric, and if the blood is too thin and inflammed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	if he should eat cool things like pomegranates and endives and lettuce with garlic, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and eat pulses, and meat from a pot, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those with a cold complexion should eat honey syrup, and moderate old and new wine, and pulses, and small birds and peewits;and those with a hot temperament should not eat too many pulses or meat, but rather drink cool water.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and on the day he is bled, he should drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give some people theriac or musk before or after bleeding to strengthen the main members;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	dilute the wine, but those who are hot-tempered should not drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The leeches that are used without causing pain are those placed on the liver, and the mumps, and podagra, and on the belly, and the groin, and the hips, for these members cannot be bled without pain, except to attract blood from one member to another, as we do when placing leeches on the breasts when the nipples are healthy;
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	to remove the viscousness that is in a member, as we do by placing leeches on the belly and groin to reduce the size of the member;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and removes pain when there is obstruction or stone, and it removes by its attractive power the obstruction, or the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	and so it does when placed over the liver and over the stomach when there is retained flatulence; these cupping glasses are administered empty in order to suck only slightly.
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water, as in the case of diseases of the pleura; in such a way one fills the cupping glass with warm water, or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the cupping glass administered by fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it should be two fingers wide and half a palm deep, and on the side near the middle it has a small hole, just big enough to push through an awl, and it should be made of copper, smooth in front so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and he has in the middle a bent rod of iron or steel, to hold a candle, and there are both large and small ones depending on the illnesses and age of those who use them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	because children's cupping glasses are different from adults', and for thin people they are different from fat people.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one should thus place this cupping glass on the member:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	take the candle of wax or linen and put it inside the cupping glass through the rod which is inside the cupping glass, so that the flame is at the bottom of the cupping glass and does not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it on the member, and one's fingers must be on the hole that we have mentioned, so that when one wants to, one can release the vapor and remove the cupping glass;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and they take the linen as before, and repeat it often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the cupping glass therefore which is administered for pleurisy, in all acute diseases, there is no tube or aperture, and it is not removed until it is full of water, and is placed on the limb alone;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Leeches are not removed until in members where one cannot place cupping glasses because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in bare flesh, such as elbow or knee, and other similar places;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of its use is such that when you find leeches in clear, clean water without mud, you should take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put them in fresh water for as long as they are famished, and have nothing in their bellies;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then cleanse the vein and apply cupping glasses, then rub the limb until it is red, and place the leeches upon it;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are flat, and itching, if it is in a place where one can apply a cupping glass, one should, because it helps a lot.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, then raise the area with a bandage, and then with water, very well, and then squeeze it out;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the bites heal too slowly after the body of the leech, then soak a linen cloth in cold water and place it on top until the leech is stretched out;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the bites are numerous, then place ground vitriol, or gall, and similar things on top until they are stretched out;
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you can place half-peeled peas on the area and leave them until they warm up the area, and it will stop right away;
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you need more, then take other leeches.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the leeches will not attach, then rub the area with fresh blood, or pierce the skin with a needle until blood comes out, and then apply the leeches; as soon as they smell the blood, they will attach.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they are sucking, then powder over a little aloe and powdered glass, or ash, and they will stop immediately.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and is a cure for fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear son, that the fools mock this chapter, which they have never seen in any ancient book or letter;
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason knowledge is strange in our land, for I have never found any good ones;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing of it except through the science of ancient books, from which I have studied so much that I have attained knowledge, and through experiment and the habit of my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	and I have described in this chapter what is contained within, and abbreviated it at the end, and clearly demonstrated the forms of the instruments that are used, just as I have done in the two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we must say in the prologue of this book the subjects of the discussion and the chapters in which the sage sets his understanding, and dwells on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a fracture, dislocation, twisting, or break occurs in someone, you must hurry to heal the patient on both sides, if anything does not heal him completely, as with weakness of the body, or old age, or frailty;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	or if the weather is not very warm, or too cold;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and eat cold foods, that is, cold joints, and bird and squirrel meat, and do not drink any wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and do not fill yourself too much with meat that fills the veins with blood, until you have reason to suspect a hot abscess or inflammation in the limb;
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	if the patient returns to his former way of life.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, one must feed the patient foods that promote swelling and stickiness, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, eggs, and offal, and fresh fish, and wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with this swelling the bones will close up and heal more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And you should know that broken bones in the elderly and the very young cannot heal well or unite naturally due to the dryness of their limbs.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but nevertheless, reset the broken bone by pulling on the large tendons that stretch and join the limb together, as tightly as it was before.
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and do not cut off all blood flow to the area; for that reason, one should feed on rich foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And you should know that there are various types of fractures in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways of fracturing.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another in grinding, as with the tip of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with a wound, and a break all over a small split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each part has its own function and its own unique healing process, according to what is remembered about it.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	And a broken bone is apparent by its crookedness and can be identified by pressing on it with the hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting or tenderness, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but there may be twisting, or splitting, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You should not move it by hand, but rather apply the remedies that follow, and then hold it firmly in place.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And you should know that the fracture that goes into the bone, and the two parts are separated, they must now be put back together equally, as with abscesses.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if hot abscesses come, he leaves them for a day or two, until the abscesses are calm;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	then he puts it back in place as easily and gently as possible, and you should know that the restoration of this one is easier than the restoration of the one with pieces;
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then they are restrained, as appropriate afterwards.Et saiches qu’il convien que tu fasses la mesme chose en celi ou il ait pieces et non pas en
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if there are broken pieces of bone, they are separated into two parts, whether it is a hand or foot, or a small limb, or two tendons, or one tendon and a hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and set the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are separated, then by all means bring the additions back into their places as you can, and be careful that your work does not cause the patient injury or pain.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust the two heads of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And feel it with your hand if you think it is not right:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	and stretch it gently, without pulling too hard or pressing as those do who bring about a hot abscess and contraction in the limb through their work, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is healed, then instruct the patient to be careful not to move it, whether waking or sleeping, turning over or in any other way:
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and make sure that the limb is secure so that he does not feel any pain.Et s’il ot aprés doulour, si le ramene a son leu selonc ke tu sai, et f
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when he feels no pain, then it is not at all, and one must put him in such a position that he feels no pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and be careful that it is set straight, so that no crookedness comes to it when it is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the qualities of the broken member are according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken members vary in smallness and greatness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small members, like arms and fingers and their likes:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	and one must wrap them in soft, fine linen;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those that are large, like thigh and leg:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	and one must wrap them in a wide, hard bandage, for the wide bandage envelops the entire large member and holds it tightly from all sides evenly so that there is no swelling.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then tie around it with light bandages, three or four according to the member, and press your hand tightly against all the bandage, then go above the dislocation and loosen it less so that the dislocation is pushed out a little;
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the bond little by little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy tissue, then take hold of another bond, and twist back and forth on the broken area;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then go to the area under the break, and pull gently, not too hard or too softly, as we have said in the first hour above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	then place between the bonds, cotton or linen, until they are all even, then tie it all tightly with a bandage on top; and then put your splints well placed on top if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place something soothing for the abscess, hot, and which reduces the swelling, and leave it thus for several days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then pull gently on your splints; they should be made of half a cane split lengthwise, or from palm wood, and made in this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the star that one puts on the fracture is a bit larger and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and also as long as it needs to be in the small or large member;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then press on the stars as you did in the first hour, then tie a string over them gently, just as you did in the first hour over the fracture;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	the tighter it is, the better, but not too tight;
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and the string should be medium thickness, not too thick or thin, and made of soft flax;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	because if the strings are thick, as I have seen foolish people make their ties with strong cords, and that is a great error, for the tie cannot be even if it is too thin, and there should not be less than two fingers' width between each star.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is wounded in the head after the stretching of his legs while healthy, then place under them linen pads or other soft cloth so that he does not get hurt.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a fracture, and the bone is broken, I will describe the treatment for this later.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not good to stretch all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when a member is swollen, you must not put splints on it for more than five or seven days, or longer depending on the heat of the abscess.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	And here is the manner of ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and torsions:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And it is that you take flour that is stored in the walls of the mill, and cook it with plenty of egg, and put this mixture, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of the plaster restoring fractures in many dispositions, especially in women and small children, because it is not too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another way of plaster restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsions: Prenes de la cire et l’uef et confis ensembles, et quanque il soit ben confis, mets li
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Take wax and eggs and cook them together, and when it is well cooked, put in 3 barberry plants and ladani and myrrh and asafetida and gum arabic, each at 10 doses;
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	myrrh and aloe, each 5 drams;
alechil VIIII З.;	aloes wood VIIII З.;
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	grind them into powder and mix with egg white;
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	if the person's complexion is hot, use this plaster, for it has a good composition and quickly restores broken bones, and benefits many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another recipe for a plaster that helps with twisting injuries:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	Take mugwort and honey, mix them together.
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	myrrh and aloes, mix seven parts.
acaice VI З.;	aloe six parts.
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	armenian bole ten parts, and grind well, and infuse with water or wine yolk, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another way to treat dislocated joints and bones that have been displaced from their sockets, and to ease the resulting pain, and to shrink the bone, and to heal fractures: take
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	take new lamb's wool, and boil it in oil and honey, and apply it to the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not restore, but it is good for soothing hot abscesses and removing pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another way to treat broken bones: take
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	take dry fig leaves and deadnettle leaves, and grind them together, and make an ointment from it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of plaster for healing bone fractures and reducing the swelling of an abscess: take new lamb's wool, moisten it in arsole and oil, and apply it to the affected area. It also helps to restore broken bones and reduce the size of an abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take the root of wormwood, chamomile, violets flowers, and wheat flour, of each one part;
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	and crush, and cook with wine, and if the member is scalded, cook it with moist coriander water or just water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method of emplastri more forceful than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take roots of marsh mallow, and flax seed, buckthorn berries, milk thistle, and dandelions, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of each one part;
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	and crush, and cook with salted water, or fresh water, or wine, depending on the heat of the member and its condition.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocrates says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken member to restore it other than a cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems according to Galen that one must put on the broken member, to restore, dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another method of plaster that is good for injury and pain:Pren flos de violetes, de camomille, de mallow, et de fenugrec, de ch
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take violets, chamomile, marsh mallow, and fenugreek flowers, all in equal parts; take mugwort and peeled human hair, or bird feathers, and marsh mallow, and mix them together, and crush them, and make plaster from it and use it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then he looses it a little after, and takes care that the patient feels no pain, nor has the bone moved from its place;
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	if he does not loosen it by hand in a few days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain comes to the place, or itching, or restlessness or swelling, then hurry and loosen it and remove the plaster immediately;
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	and take a light cloth, and a sponge of damp sea-sponge, and dip it in water, and lift up the place until the itching stops, and the pain is eased;Et s’il ne leve pas tant qu’il fuige la fieve, si covient li ostre l’emplaustre, et le mettre ades a l’ombre et a leu fraich, tant que li dolor se paier.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	then let the member rest an hour, then put on lamb's wool dampened in water or rose oil, and bind it up with a cloth, until you are sure there is no hot abscess;Et s’il vient aposteme a la dent, que li dent soit mise sus ainne fraiche, et li leu sea moillie en aigue, ou oile de luisant, ou oile d’amand, si covient le mettre sus dent fraiche, tant qu’elle se
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	and relieve inflammation of the member, and remove pain, then start again with gentle pressure, and a little ointment, and do not squeeze as hard as before.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and gently until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, and you need ointment and binding, then do it again, just as you did before.Et se il n’est pas sanez, et il ne te veult bien estraindre, si covient qu’il soit osté dou membre et mis en autrui lieu, et li membre ben liien et ben reposé.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if there is nothing of what we have said in the member, do not dislocate it until 3 or 4 or 5 or 7 days.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And sometimes leave it for 20 days according to what one sees, as long as the fracture heals and the bone nears the surface.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	then reduce it further than before, and increase its flesh, as I said earlier;
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	and if you see the area drier than necessary, know that healing cannot occur;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	then immerse it in warm water every time you dislocate it, and do so every third day, and loosen the pressure a little;
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	by this work then shorten the growth of the member, and gently mend what the foolish do, who restore the crooked member.
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	It is evil, and if it is done timidly, I see no other outcome than weariness and doing it correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various kinds of fractures:
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many types of fractures, and various shapes, and the causes are distinct.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	for there are fractures that are made by the impact of a sword, and the collar bone breaks all the way to the hyoid which is under the jawbone, as with a blow or a staff;
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	and because of this type of fracture is called 'a sword cut'.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	Or the sword cuts the bone from above without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called 'absolute';
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	and the wound of these two fractures are large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a blow with a bladed weapon, or a split or from the collarbone, or from falling on stone, or from other similar causes.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a broken bone piercing through to the membrane below the bone, or on top of the bone, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound that is buried in the bone as subtle as a hair, and the split is small, and therefore this fracture is called "capillary";
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	and if the wound is made by a stone or by falling, or by a similar object, and drives the bone below, and the site is hairy like a blacksmith when they work on kettles;
si entre li piere dedens.	if it pierces the bone inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more often in those who have moist bones in their heads, like children's heads;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and it happens in all types of fractures where small pieces are separated like tiles;Et quant li os se fend et est les pieces separees, adonc covient le chief d’en tirier la piece qui est dedens, ou il li sanz
et je em parlerai en son leu.	And when the bone splits and the pieces are separated, then you must pull out the piece that is inside the wound,
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we shall know all kinds of fractures through examination, and through the corruption that is upon them, and through the foulness that is upon them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair is known when one has uncovered the bone and rubbed it, if the fracture appears black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, be wary of the signs of illness, and if you see any bad signs, such as vomiting of blood, loss of consciousness, swelling, fever, eyes bulging and reddening, and other similar things in various dispositions, then it cannot heal without a doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a fearful accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the patient comes to you first, and it is winter, then you should remove the tooth before the fourteenth day that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the spring, then you should hurry to remove the tooth before the seventh day, so that the gum beneath the tooth does not become corrupted, and the accidents we have described occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the bone fracture extends to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the fractured part like this:Quant tu sens li os qui est brisez, tant qu’il soit moelleux et friable, tu le rendras si fort com il fu por son naturel;
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and you must grip the head of the dislocated joint and expose the bone in every way you can, and probe the wound more gently than you can, and if bleeding occurs when exposing the bone, or an abscess forms, treat it with what is appropriate, and you must fill the area with soft rags soaked in rose oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and let the wound rest until the abscesses are calm and bleeding is stopped;
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	then begin to cut around the bone, and this is done in two ways:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	one way is to cut straight across in front, and that is the shape:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another larger cut than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second way is to have many different cuts, some narrow and some wide, and they are pointed, and made of iron:
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and work gently so you do not wound the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is hard and thick, you must pierce it all around so that you can apply the trepan with chisels, not deeply enough to penetrate through the skull, and there should be a rim or ring on top of the point so that it does not go through the bone.
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	And you should have several of these so that each one comes into its own place in the thickness of the bone so that you can use chisels for all the skull.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	There are three ways to make chisels:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The technique for piercing around a broken bone is to place the chisel on the bone and twist it with your hands until you feel that the bone is pierced;
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	Then move the chisel to another spot a little further away and do this all around. Then cut into the space between the perforations with a cutting instrument, as subtly and gently as you can, as we have said, until you pull out the bone with your hand or one of the instruments you have, such as tweezers;
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	and make sure you do not touch the brain or the eye.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone and cut it, you should resect the thickness that remains in the bone with some other instrument like a chisel, but it should be more thin and more delicate than the other chisel;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	and if anything of the small bones or any scales remain, remove them easily with the instrument;
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	then dress the wound with tenting and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And the other method of treatment is that which Galen describes, which is safer;
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and he highly recommends it, and it is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	First, you must expose a part of the bone, at the place where the fracture is open, so that when you have exposed that part, you shall place under the head of this lens-shaped incision, from which the fracture has occurred, in order to cut it.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut from one side only, for the wound is open on both sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	then hit it gently with a small mallet all around, taking care not to damage the membrane underneath.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is attached to the bone, gently pull at it, for the bone can be removed without harm or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce through to the membrane, and the bone is only cut slightly on top, and there are small pieces, then one must smooth out that roughness, and remove the scales with a sharp rasp which you should have in various sizes, in order to adapt it to each location according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Take a large rasp first, and then a finer one afterwards, and do not stop doing this until it is smooth.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	For all other hairline and subtle fractures, you should treat them according to their specific nature:
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	and this is not something that can be learned by one who has dedicated himself to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is open, you should wet a linen cloth with rose oil according to the size of the wound, and place it over the wound.
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	Then take another double cloth, dip it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth.
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	Then apply pressure as gently as you can so as not to tear the wound, then place another bandage over it, without tightening it more than necessary to hold the wound in place.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	and leave it thus for a day or two, until the abscess is soothed, then loosen it, and administer remedies such as lily roots, and wheat flour, and incense powder, and aristolache, and similar things;
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and make a powder from these things, and apply it to the wound, and then administer other remedies without biting;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	and guard against the wound becoming dirty, so that you do not leave ointment on it, nor allow pus to gather, for when pus gathers on the membrane of the brain, it will become infected and cause great harm to the patient;
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	for when one applies something biting to a sore, it bites from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without a doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if darkness does not come from the medicine one has applied, but because of the power it has, one must take a portion of honey and three parts of rose oil, and mix them into a paste, and apply it to the sore;
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat with various treatments until he is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose are broken, or one part by itself, because there are two bones in it;
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	and that which is underneath is cartilage, and does not break, unless it is split or twisted, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should put your little finger or a hole in the nose, and place that broken part inside your index finger, and hold it in place by force, so that the nose returns to its natural shape;
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.Et s’il se finde ke la brisure est a l’enbas dou neis, si covient que tu le tiennes aler a bas
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is above the nail, and the fingers cannot reach the spot, then you must use the end of a thick stick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is in both parts, do likewise and hurry to reset it on the first day, if you can;
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess is calm, then put a linen tent on the head of the wound, if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	Or you place another in another part, if the fracture is there;
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	and let the tents be so big that they fill the holes of the wound.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some restorers say that one must wet the bandages with butter, and change them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It does not seem to me that this is good, but one must make them wet with egg white and flour;
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	then leave the tent, until the bone is stiff, and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And sometimes one puts in goose feathers instead of tents, and around it a soft cloth, and the fracture is held, and the patient breathes among them;
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	or do what you wish.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if hot abscesses come to the nose while you are working on it, then put a poultice of rose oil or in a little diaquilon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if there is no abscess, then put on a plaster, by force, of wheat flour, and incense powder, cooked with egg white, then place gentle compresses on top, and do not bind the wound;
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the fracture of the nose is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract it with appropriate instruments for this, then close the slit, and treat with healing, warming things like plasters and ointments suitable for this;
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if there is no wound inside the nose, then treat it with tenting, and insert canes of lead, until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the dislocation of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is dislocated below and there is no external wound, and the break is only out of place, and not broken in two, so that it curves inside, then one can easily tell.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, for you to put your index finger into the patient's mouth;
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	and if the fracture is in the left jaw, then put your index finger from your right hand, and gently insert it into the fracture, and ease it with the other hand, and apply pressure evenly.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jaw is separated by one-sixth, then you should administer an extension of one-sixth, so that it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if there is movement of the teeth, or grating, then hold them in place with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then apply cerote over the broken jaw, and over that, place a double layer of cloth;
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	and place over the wound a well-made bandage, or a piece of leather of equal length and width according to the jaw, and tie it as tightly as possible, and instruct the patient to rest and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the swelling changes, then release it for a third of the day, and then reapply pressure where it is swollen.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	And place an ointment on top, made of ground powder with egg white or sisam flour, after you have removed the bandage.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	And place a light lining on top of the ointment, and if the ointments don't work, and the condition of the patient doesn't change, leave it until he is healed.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	many times it is healed within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if hot abscesses develop, then administer what we have already said many times.Et se il a contusion sus la mandibule, si met sus cerote, et sus le cerote lainne legiere, et li estele longes; et se li estele s’aert, met ainche sus lainne legiere, si come tu oges li contusions; et adonques covient il que li disloque la mandibule a leu.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is a fracture and wound together, examine to see if any pieces of bone are missing;
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	so skillfully of the host are suitable instruments to this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and there remains none inside, then stitch up the wound, if it is wide, and place upon it a suitable poultice to promote healing.
de la forcele	of the armpit
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The fracture is broken several times in front, towards the shoulder, and the break is according to 3 ways:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	either it is broken and separated into two, and there are pieces, and this is the easiest to restore;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the work is such that when the break is without a wound, you need two ministers so that one can hold the shoulder where the fracture is;
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the other stretches the neck towards the affected part;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	then put your fingers on the break evenly so that the shape is as it should be and there is no appearance or misalignment.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you need to stretch further, place under the shoulder a round pillow made of cloth or woolen fabric, as thick as your necessity demands;
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	and hold the forceps lightly, and squeeze the spear in your hand so that you make the break even as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the collarbone out of its socket because it is too deep, then the patient should lie on his back, and place a small pillow under the shoulder, and the assistants should lift the shoulder from below, so that the collarbone bone is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	Then grasp the break with your fingers, and if you find it loose, you must split it open;
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and gently pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot join because of an overhang, then cut it with one of your knives;
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but you must place under the forceps this instrument to protect the nerve:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and it should be like a spoon, and not jagged, and as wide as is necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the action;
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and it has two heads, as you can see, and one is wide and the other narrow, according to the shape of the wound that you made when you pulled out the bone;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are certain of a hot abscess, cut open the wound, and if the rupture is small, or if you doubt it is a hot abscess, then apply the wound with bandages and dressings according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses come, soak a bandage in rose oil, garlic, and wine, and place it over the wound:
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The dislocation of the bone, when there is no wound or incision, is to place upon the bone the plaster made from mill-dust and egg white, and place light dressings on top, and if necessary, put a splint beneath the joint.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	Then take a very large bandage, one palm wide, then place double draping over the dressings and plaster;
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a thin rod three digits wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage so that the end of the bandage hangs down;
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	and place the rod over the fracture, and wrap the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy joint, and under the affected joint;
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and realign each part, and when you see that the dislocation is aligned correctly, and you see clearly that the bone is not moving within the fracture, then release it daily, and when the ligaments loosen, restrain them.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	Have the patient lie on his back, and while he sleeps, place a small pillow under the shoulder to raise it;
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	If the dislocation of the shoulder is improved by raising it, then tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless some accident happens, for up to 20 days;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	Then start the poultice again if you see that it is needed, and restrain and leave him until he is healed;and then have him lie on his back, and place a small pillow under the shoulder to raise it; If the shoulder dislocation improves by raising it, then tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless some accident happens, for up to 20 days; Then start the
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	and it is restored in most people within 28 days, and in less time for some.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of a shoulder dislocation
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	It sometimes happens that the shoulder is dislocated or widely displaced, and it is not set right until touched;
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	then, according to the pattern of the dislocation, reset it in its natural shape, in every way you can;
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	then apply powder from the mill with egg white, and light poultices, and put on top a double layer of cloth;
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	then place a wide and thin splint, slightly larger than the shoulder, on top, and if there is swelling beneath the splint in any part of the shoulder, apply poultices made of flax to that area so that the splint sits evenly;
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	then tie it firmly with a wide bandage so that the splint does not move from its place, and check the bandage every day;
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	and every time it softens, he squeezes it and puts the joint back in place if it is out of position, and then the patient lies on his side.
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	and the shoulder is restored within 20 or 25 days.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when this period is over, he releases it and is confident, for it is not an easy bone to put back in place.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone has come out in front and is not under the collarbone, cut it away, and do as we have said before about heating the abscess to ease the pain.Et si li espaule est desaloiee par cause de moistor, et on la remet en son leu, et elle ne puet demorer en son leu, si revient adés et desalue par petit mouvement qui avient; si doit on la disloquer premierement, et puis la ramonyer.
de la brisure dou pis	of the break of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The bones are sometimes broken in the middle, but that rarely happens;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it often breaks at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it inclines downward, and the patient feels great pain and suffering, and becomes constipated and feverish, and may vomit blood, and the bones of the fracture become visible, and he feels much discomfort.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and he places a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and joins the ribs with both hands, trying to put everything in order as best he can;
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	then he applies plasters and poultices made of subtle salt, or other light wood, and wraps it in a cloth, placing it on the broken bone so that it does not move;
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	and turn the bandage smoothly around the back, and tighten it gently, and check every hour that the wound is healing; if it softens, then tighten it.
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	and if it needs to be loosened, because of corrosion or itching that comes up on the skin, or pain or abscess, then hurry and loosen it, and wipe off the ointment, and address whatever has come about in various ways of healing.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then reset the ointment, and tighten it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the break of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Know that broken ribs only come from large wounds on the back, and in the chest, and only bend because they are slippery.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and feel it well with your hands as you should.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And in treatment, you must set the break evenly, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply the ointment and bind it with a bandage, if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the broken ribs are declining inward, then the patient feels great pain and piercing, just as with pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	and has fainting spells, and becomes dizzy and vomits a great deal of blood, and this is a serious illness, and the ancients have placed great importance on it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that one should administer foods that swell the belly, in order to push the fracture outward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make any incision unless an abscess is hot, if it has not become so already.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has become so, then we lance it to let out the pus and the unhealthy matter.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And some say that one should place cupping glasses over the area to draw out the infection, and this is sensible advice.
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	However, there is a concern that the cupping glass might attract excess fluids due to the weakness of the body.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	Some say that one should cover the affected area with warm, moist wool and place tenting between the ribs to ensure even pressure all around; then it should be treated with a poultice of pleurisy root, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear due to the bone protruding through the skin, and there is doubt about the condition, then one should cut over the area of the broken rib, and place an instrument underneath to push out the shrapnel;
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then split the bone and pull gently, and afterwards sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat it with poultices until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if a hot abscess comes, put wet bandages in rose oil, and put them on the site.
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat the area around the abscess as needed, and let him lie quietly on his side where he should be, until he is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the break in the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Sometimes there is a fracture of the collarbone, and it can bend;
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take note if you see his hands soft, swollen, and numb, and he cannot move or straighten them, and when you prick him with a needle, he does not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is deadly in many cases, and if they are mute and feel nothing when you dislocate and prick them, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the illness is cured, if one applies a remedy.Si tu vois ses mains enflees et molles et que l’on les estraint et poigne, si sent bien et muent, saiches qu’il n’est pas guerez, car la mort y entre.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if something similar happens in the spine of the back, and you want to know if he is healthy or not, take note if his feet are swollen, and if the symptoms are in his hands, and on his back there are wind and urination without intention;
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	and when he is lying on his stomach, there is urination without intention.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he lies on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Know that it is deadly:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	if you do not work on its cure.Quant li piez sunt amollis et le dos sanz egestion
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not occur, then the condition is more minor.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And if there is an abscess in the spine, then put rosemary oil or hen's egg yolk on it until it is soothed.
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and tie it with a cloth, and instruct the patient to rest.
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	and not to sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bone dislocates, then it is necessary to cover the heart;
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and remove the bone, then unite the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch, and the physician should apply ointment around the wound, until it is healed.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the 'head of the neck', if you force your left palm into a pouch shape, and place it equally in the other hand to your ability, then apply the plaster and bandage it up, if you need it;
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then they bind it up, and if there is bone exposed, they stitch it up, and the surgeon treats the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	Sometimes the hip bone is broken, and if that happens, there will be some lessening in the thickness of the head.
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	and they go to the bowels, and decline towards the armpits, and bring pain to the affected area, and numbness, and swelling in what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And for the cure, you must extend your hand over the break;
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and you must know where the break is and what its shape is;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	and if the break is only in the head, then put it back into place so that it is in its natural position and shape.Et s’il avient en la coillee, et li chief est dessoubre, si leve la coillee tant qu’ele soit sus la br
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it tilts inwards, then have the patient lie on his stomach, so that the restoration of the fracture can be prepared.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have made it even, then put on the plaster, and then a splint of wood or horn, and hold the fracture steady so that it does not move.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and apply it under the armpits as far as the elbow joint, until the arm is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if swollen abscesses appear, do not touch them until the swollen abscesses are reduced, and apply what we have said earlier.Et s’il y a paor ou dountance, si covient que li malsainz soit assesié en un leu clerguier, et qu’ele soit gardee par clergues, et que li clercs prie
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	And then return to the restoration, and hold it as it should be, if there is no bad outcome;and li clercs preient li chiés d’un costé et d’autrè la man, tant que li membre soit igal.
et c’est li maniere.	And this is the manner of doing it.Et quant li malsainz est assesié
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The shoulders are what is between the neck and the head of the shoulder, and if it is dislocated, it should be restored according to one of two methods:la premiere est que li malsainz soit assesié en un leu clerguier; et s’il y a paor ou dountance, si covient que li malsainz soit assesié en un leu clerguier, et qu’ele soit gardee par
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	one of which is to take a straight medium-sized stick, according to this shape:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	Tie his arms with cords, and hold them up, and seat the patient on the chair;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	then pour boiling water on his arms, as far down as possible, and place a cushion of wood under him, then stretch him out over something heavy so that he is stretched out downwards;
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	then the operator puts the broken arm back in place, making it even with his other hand, so that it is put back in its proper place.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	The other method is to have the patient lean forward onto his elbow, and tie his hand to his neck; then instruct two assistants, one to pull upward on what is above the break with both hands, and the other to pull downward at each end of the stick, pulling in opposite directions.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you want the extraction to be more forceful, then press the ligament below the fracture, and above it, and stretch each of the muscles on their own.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, then you must put one cord under the armpit and the other towards the neck, under the fracture;
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	and likewise if the fracture is towards the neck, then you must tie it gently without exerting force, so that the broken arm is aligned with its position and with the neck;
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	then put it back evenly, as it should be, and hold it there, if no abscess forms.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if an abscess does form, do not hold it until the seventh day, and put soft lamb's wool in oil of roses on it, until the abscess is healed.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	Then hold it, and the way to hold it is to put the ointment on the dislocation, then raise the arm above the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or breast;
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	and hold it tightly, and the cloth too, so that the arm stays in place, unless something moves it or the bone shifts.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone has moved, use splints and put one splint wider and thicker than the others over the dislocation, with two fingers of space between each splint, and make sure each splint is as long as it needs to be to extend past the dislocation on both sides;
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	then stretch them over the stars, as I said at the beginning of the chapter about fracture, more strongly and less by moving away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the base of the stars and the stretching, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the hot abscess, then leave it to ligature until the seventh day, as we have said;
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	then look at each of the three days at the bandage, that itching nor swelling comes to it, nor the growth can come to the member because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	As the adage says, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such accident comes, then take off the bandage after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach;
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	and put under the shoulder a pillow of wool the same height, and look every hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken member does not move, or the bandage become slack;
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	if he receives treatment through medical skill, and is given the food that we have mentioned earlier, in such a way that the food reaches the most subtle parts.
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	and when he begins to recover, then he can eat solids.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be treated for 40 days altogether;
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	and then one must loosen and administer baths and ointments to ease the joint.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the dislocation is severe and stuck, it will stay for 50 days or two months.
de la brisure du bras	Of the break in the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm consists of two bones, which are called the 'ulna', of which one is small and lies below the armpit;
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other is large, and is the one that lies above, towards the little finger;
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	by chance it may be just the large ulna that is broken, or just the small one, or both of them together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small ulna is broken, the restoration and healing are easy;
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	and when the bones are broken, then healing is difficult, and more painful than when they are only broken in one place.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it's only the small bone that's broken, one should gently extend and put it in place.Et s’il est brisié soulement li gros, li petis est a l’envers; il doit estre ramené a son leu.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it is a tough bone, then it must be extracted with greater force;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	and he should be laid on a pillow, and the arm pouch higher than the rest, and the little finger lower than the other fingers, and the patient's crosswise body weight on him, and the pillow in front of him higher so that the patient does not suffer any strain;
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	then the minister should extend his upper arm to the part under his hand, or to the elbow, and another minister to the other above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then put the minister equally, according to his best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if there are pieces in the fracture, place each one back in its proper location; and if there is any dislocation, hold the heart, and reset the bone as we have described earlier.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken about it in a single chapter;
si pren la cure.	then take the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if in the beginning of recovery, pustules arise, then apply a dressing of cerate made from rose oil and white wax, not too hard or soft;
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and I gently wrap it above, until the hot abscess is soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	Then remove the poultice, and apply the plaster of flour with egg white, then place the bandages, and have the bandage for the fracture be stronger and slightly larger than the others.
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	And know that there must be six bandages on the arm in various places:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	Whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two;
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and holds more tightly over the fracture than elsewhere, and always less as it heals, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter;
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and the bandages that are over the fracture must be soft and moist, and not hard or rough;
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	and the thread it is bound with, of linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And re-examine the limb and the ligament after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if an accident occurs to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then you should soak the member in hot water until the itching is relieved.
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the member not be bound but rest easy.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then restart the stretching, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones loosened, and similar things, then address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you see that the nutrients cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you should loosen it a little and leave it like that for some days, until the nutrients flow, and then bind it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not release him until 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	or in this position, he can place his hands on his neck, and let his necks be even, and guard against movement and dislocation, and sleep on his back;
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	and know that this broken bone will be healed in 30 days or 35, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the combinations and complexes of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that in the back of the hand and at the base of the fingers there are few fractures, and they only come from manyfold folds.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, then the patient should place his arms in a cross position and stand upright in front of him, evenly.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	Then he should put his hand on the ground stretched out, and stretch the minister's broken bones, and make them even with each other, so that they are well joined;
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	and put on the plaster and the bandages, if no abscesses develop there, then he puts on a splint according to the amount of space available.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and is wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the fracture is on the side of the body around the belly, make a sphere out of bandages, and instruct the patient to press it against their fractured side.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	Then he pulls on a long bandage and the splint should be made of soft wood as large as the palm of the hand, and he presses it against the fracture, just as it should be.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the forearm, then you should put a splint on top and another underneath the plant, so that the hand is open and straight; then tie it all around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the fracture is in one of the fingers, then he puts it straight, just as it should be;
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	and he presses against the side, and if you see that a small straight splint is placed to lift the fracture, and it does not move;
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	and if the fracture is in another finger, such as the index or one of the others, he should make it even and bind it with the healthy finger next to it;
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	or you can tie them all together in a bunch, or put a splint on it, such as a little bag;
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	and take care in the restoration and in the preparation of a hot abscess, and treat those that arise, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The thighbone is often broken, and one can see it when it turns forward and backward;
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	and the restoration is that one binds the broken bone above, and the other below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And let the patient lie on his face, then extend each band evenly on its own part;
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and that is when the fracture is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is close to the hip joint, then one ligament should be directed towards the buttock, and the other ligament beneath the fracture.Et li auter liiens que est sous le cotil, qu’il soit vers la cuixe.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And if it is near the knee, then let the band be above the knee, and the extension below;
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	then put the mirror to the bone equal to his two hands, so that it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the ointment, and bind it, if no abscess comes out.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is a hot abscess, let it calm down, then return to your work and treatment;
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	the ligature is made in such a way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	You must wrap the break with a tough double folded bandage in 2 or 3 places, and leave off the excess, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the toe, and insert the long thread between the thigh and leg, below the knee, and let the end of the thread come above;
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	then turn the bandage around the leg and thigh, then put splints on the break, and put a splint on the bone of the leg;
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	then take eight inches of soft fabric between the leg and thigh to even out the strain, then start binding tightly three times or four times above the break.
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	and as you go higher above the break, lessen the strain;
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	then tie two ends of the thread that you have taken between the leg and thigh, then tie three knots that are above, then go back down to the bottom of the thread, as far as the foot;
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	and tighten it so that it does not move out of place, then leave it as it is, so that no abscess or swelling or other similar thing comes.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if something happens to it, then untie it and fix what is wrong, as we have said many times;
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	and if there are pieces of bone that poke out, they should be removed, if possible.
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	and if one cannot, then one must split the area and pull it out;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And sometimes the thigh is broken in such a way that one puts in nails, like in the shoulder and arm;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	Nevertheless, this restoration does not cure the disease.Et s’il est de si grant force ke il ne se puet demourer a leu, si convient adés le
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And you shall know that the hip is restored in one day or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the groove of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the joint of the knee there is little breaking, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is only a split, or a perforation, and it happens to all wounds, and without wound, and this feels good to everyone.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is such that one puts an equal weight on his fingers, as long as he can bear it;and if he cannot bear it, then he must dislocate it again.Et s’il est en la main ou au pie, et qu’il soit de si grant force ke il ne se puet adés remuer, si convient il que tu le
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	And if it is in the hand or foot, and it is of such great force that he cannot move it at all, then you must first put the plaster on, and a round nail if necessary, and bind it as it should be, then follow all the instructions we have given for other fractures, like hot abscess and similar.Et s’il est en la main ou au pie, et qu’il soit de si grant force ke il ne se puet adés remuer, si convient il que tu le puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on each dressing as it is needed, until he is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is properly called the "muster", and the other the "foscle".
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	and all the other injuries are as they are in the arm, and their restoration is also the same, and the operations are the same too. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg is twisted all over.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if only the small bones are fractured, then it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bone is broken, great pain is felt, and it can be seen clearly;
et torne desoz.	and it turns inside out.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Therefore apply traction, and put it back in place, and bind the splints evenly;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	However, if the fracture is bad, and there are several pieces, then the traction should be lighter and gentler;
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and heal according to your power.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have finished your work, take two bundles of wood shavings that are purple-dyed at one end and white at the other, and let them be as long as the leg from just above the knee to just below.
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	Then wrap two bands of linen around them, one above and one below, and also at the middle, and at this point he will not be able to bend his leg to the right or left, and thus it is well.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	and some apply an oil made from fir wood, and they put the leg in a splint to prevent movement, and they properly apply this to the break where there is injury;
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	and every day move the leg to see if there is any hot abscess or other accident;
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	from the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the metatarsal bones there can sometimes be a fracture, and it occurs in various ways.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	If it happens that the bones of the foot are broken, and you see one bone on top of another, then place your foot upon the ground as if you wanted to walk, and then put your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their places.
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	Then apply the ointment and bandages on top, and place a small flat stone beneath the sole of the foot, then tighten it in a cast, and after you have wrapped cloth around it, and any other things you require.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And after three or four days have passed, loosen the binding, for you will find the bones healed, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if there are broken fingers, restore them as we said for the fingers of the hand:
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	Then place a splint along the length of the broken finger, and let it be a bit larger, then place that flat stone beneath the foot as I described, and tighten it in a cast.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	and if there are 2 or 3, or more, broken, then put on each toe a plaster according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and hold the table under the foot;
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	and be standing on the top of the table from under the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, which we have discussed;
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	and treat each condition as it should be.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the break in the bone of the elbow
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bones of a woman's pelvis are fractured, have her sit with her legs apart, then lean forward from the waist, and be held from behind;
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	then fill the pelvic area with cotton, and put in it as much as a stone;
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	then stand the woman up, and loosen the back little by little, and then jump the cotton, until it comes to the opening of the pelvis, and the bones return with the stone;
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished urinating, put it back again, and do this for seven days or so:
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	the fracture will be restored, and if you wish, take a lamb's bladder, and tie it at the opening with a string, and fill the whole bladder with natural urine;
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	then blow into the pipe firmly, until the bladder is swollen inside:
la nature si revenra li brisure;	the natural state will return to the fracture;
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then fill it with cotton and leave it like that for a few days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bone of the finger of a man or woman is broken, restore it in the same way as we have said for the bone of the hip;
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	and they are not hidden from those who devote themselves to it and understand my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the fractures indicate, with many dispositions, the right way to restoration:
enten le donques.	 understand it therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	In a penis that is fractured, take a goose's gullet and insert the penis into it;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	then wrap cloth around it, and leave it for three days or more, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	from a break with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the thigh or shoulder bone or similar, that they be bled immediately, in accordance with the bleeding we have described earlier.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound bleeds, then resume reducing the dislocation in that same hour or that day, if no abscesses form.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses form, then leave it until the third or fourth day, as long as the abscesses are relieved; do not touch it on the second day, nor the third, for you would bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible on the uncovered chest, you should gently touch it with your hands, making small movements.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if you cannot move it into place with your hands, then reset it using an instrument of iron which is seven or eight inches long, and the width depends on the size of the wound;
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and for this reason it is necessary to use an instrument that is three or four inches wide, according to the need in each case of a fracture;
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and let it be rounded and a little thick so that it does not bend when you press it against the limb during your work, and let it be pointed at the end, and thicker at the middle towards the front, thus;
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And it is called "palainche", because the curved head of the bone should be placed on the visible part of the skull;
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	and then press down until it returns, and make them even against each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle, and the instrument cannot well grasp the bone, then you must shave the head of the bone, so that the instrument can get a grip.Et se li chiés sont desaloiez a cause de moistor, et on les remettra et il n’i demourra pas, mais revient adés et desalue par petit mouvement qui advient, si convien que tu disloques la première fois.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, then use the end of a suitable instrument, whether an incision knife or needle, to your ability;
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	then scrape away what remains in the bone of asperity and small fragments.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	Do this until it is in its place, then soak the cloth in red wine vinegar, and apply it clean if it is soiled;
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not put any ointment or other thing on the wound except oil, lest pus and corruption come from it;
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	then bandage the patient once you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and wrap the cloth around it according to the size of the wound, and take great care that the wound is not pressed upon with the bandage;Et si tu vuoilles mettre cerote ou oile sus la plaie, ou il t’appartient, qu’il n’i fust porriture ne corruption.
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	and many times this has been done by fools, and sometimes brought about the death of the patient or corrosion;
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	and it is the most painful and most severe of all fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is large and you doubt that an accident might occur as we have said, and you find pain in the area, then you should not put anything on it;
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	but wrap around, instead of stabs, hard cloth, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days pus forming on the wound, then remove what you have placed over it completely, and apply an ointment that heals wounds, such as tetra-pharmacon and similar remedies.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary to loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is healed and closed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that the bowstring runs smoothly and lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they go astray for many days, and it cannot heal but keeps going back and forth, know that there are small pieces of bone, because of which you should probe the wound with a tent and remove all these dislocated pieces that cause the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula or any other kind of corruption occurs, you should treat it according to what he said in the chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, as in the thigh or shoulder, and similar large limbs, do not draw it out, because many die from that, but let it be until it heals;
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	perhaps it will fall out after 20 or 30 days, then cure the wound if you can;s’il reste ades, tant qu’il ne porrisse, mais le lie entor, et en li leu qu’il
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of bruises that come on the healing site
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	There often comes after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and it is an ugly sight to see the limb deformed;
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	and sometimes the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	So take care then when we are young:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	if the doctor prescribes astringent medicines like aloes, incense, myrrh, sarcocolla, and similar things, so that you mix some of these things together, or all together, and infuse them with styptic wine, or egg white, or garlic;
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and apply them to the navel as a poultice, binding it on tightly and not removing it for several days;
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	then remove it and start again with another one, until the swelling is gone;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	or you can use a well-made splint;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	for the properties of the splint are such that it removes all swelling from the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the knotting has turned into hardness like stone, and it needs to be removed, then cut away at it, and the excess will become apparent;
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	or you can have a barber shave it so that it is removed, and treat the area until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb which is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and remains after the limbs become weak and sottish, this happens for many reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	one reason is that it was bound too tightly, and not as it should have been;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or because there were too many ligatures, and the limb could not receive nourishment;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	or from excessive moisture;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or from too much movement, not in its proper time;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	or because he has little blood in his body and is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the treatment is that you should have the patient eat, and make his body warm, so that his blood is multiplied within him;
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and give him a bath, and joy and leisure;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	then apply pitch to the limb so that it attracts a great deal of warmth, and often bathe it in warm water, until the warmth penetrates the limb;
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and it returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the limb bent after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limb is twisted after being reset, and the broken bones are still open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function:
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	if you do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb again from the start, and many fools have indeed done this in our land;
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and this work is blamed, and great harm comes from it, and sometimes death;
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	Nevertheless, if the dislocations and wounds are fresh, then they should be washed with hot water or herbs that soften, such as leaves of marsh-mallow, roots, and honeysuckle, and similar things;
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	and make a soothing ointment, such as well-prepared diaquilon, and take the mucilage of marsh-mallow, and confit it with goose fat or olive oil, and apply it to the wound;
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	Or take fat figs, and crush them with colon dung, and similar remedies that soften quickly.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the dislocation is caused by continually and constantly rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And every hour, movement must be applied to the limb.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the wounds are old and hardened like stone, and need to be cut with iron, then they should be covered all the way to the bone, with a subtle incision lightly;Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and put trust and study into the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to someone, one must immediately reset it without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if one delays, the place will swell, and perhaps one will put it back out of place.
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	Therefore, one must not move it when it is swollen:
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	many times causing spasms and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	Nevertheless, when this happens, let the patient bleed, then leave him, until the abscesses are opened;
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	then warm the limb with hot water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each joint as the cure will come into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have arranged the chapters on dislocations from the head to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jaw
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	Sometimes the jaws are dislocated downwards, and the dislocation of both is according to two manners:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	either they are slightly pushed out of their sockets, and softened a little;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	or they are fully dislocated, hanging down towards the bottom, and drooling saliva from his mouth which he cannot hold in, nor close his mouth, nor control his tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is minor, it can be treated with various remedies.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is entire and complete, then you must reset it quickly, and not tarry at all;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	and in such a way that the assistant grasps the head of the patient, and thrusts his fingers of one hand into the root of the jaw at the dislocation within the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides;
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other two hands should be used to apply pressure equally;
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and instruct the patient to relax his jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And he applies the cautery evenly until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if the reset is painful, especially if both jaws are displaced together, then they should be soothed with hot water and oil until they can be reset gently;Et s’il ne puet endurer la douleur de li ramener, et qu’il soit a grevance de sa vie, si le mets on une corde a l’entorn de li col et tire li cordons tant qu’il se ramene a son chief et qu’
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if he cannot endure the pain of the reset, and it threatens his life, then put a rope around his neck and pull the ropes until his head is
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the disease is closed well without softening, then place on wet cloths a poultice made of rose oil and wax, then bind it lightly with soft bandages.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the patient sleep on his back, and let his shoulders be between two pillows so that he does not move them to the right or left, nor try to move his arms, but eat soft food until the pain is gone and the jaws are numbed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then he can eat whatever he wants softly, and not to struggle to open his mouth to eat and drink until the mandibles are well numbed and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be reset within an hour and are not converted to their place, then fevers and usual sores come, and possibly stomach problems, and possibly vomiting clear fluid.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, then you will know that it is pernicious;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and often the person dies within nine days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The foreskin cannot be cured by cauterization near the glans or foreskin, and sometimes it is cured by cauterization further away, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the restoration is such that the patient lies on his back, and extends his arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then press the area firmly with your palm, and it will return;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then apply the plaster and bandage, and bind it tightly;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the shoulder which is towards the neck cannot dislocate;
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	if not, and if it dislocates even once, then reset it to its place as we have said;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	then apply the plaster and bandage, and bind it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed;
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and in the same way, the shoulder of the spine is reset when it has dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	You should know that the shoulder can dislocate in three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	one is when it dislocates to the part of the axilla below;et l’aultre est qu’ele desalue en haut, selonc la guarde de la chiée, tant qu’ele soit au dessus de la
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second is at the bottom of the foot;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and occasionally it dislocates from above, and this rarely happens;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, and it does not dislocate within for the nerves;
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	and sometimes it dislocates underneath towards the armpit, especially in those who are thin, for in them it is very dangerous;
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	in those who are fat, it dislocates easily, and goes back in easily.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And occasionally it happens to some people that they experience a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells from a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	Therefore, you must test it to be certain;et si tu le veux esprouver adonques faiz ainsi: prends un crot de fer et met il adonques sus li piez ou li main, et
et adonques encomence la cure.	and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And you will know it is a dislocation when it is lower towards the armpit, and there will be a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them;
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and underneath it, at the bottom of the socket, the head of the shoulder, as if it were an egg.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move in any way;
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and also, if it is dislocated in the upper part, it will not be hidden, for you will see it clearly at the socket;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this kind of dislocation is not difficult to fix when it is new, as long as the child is not sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the method is for the minister to lift the hand of the patient up, then place your fingers underneath the socket, and raise the joint forcefully into place.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	and the minister lifts the hand, and extends it upward, then puts it back under the socket;
si venra hastanment.	it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come as we have said within a few days after, then the patient must be bathed in warm water.
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and the administrator should apply softening and soothing ointments, such as a decoction of alder and fenugreek and melilot in water, and it should be applied.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then the patient should be laid on his back, and a pillow of wool that is neither too soft nor too hard should be placed underneath the shoulder blade, then the patient should put their heel on the pillow, and the practitioner should gently lift the shoulder and pull the hand of the affected arm.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	And another assistant holds the head of the patient so that it does not move downward.
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	That shoulder will return immediately, and if you see that it is reset according to this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	And you should have a man who is larger than the patient present.
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and be straight towards the side, and push his shoulder under the armpit of the sick person, and lift the armpit up, so that the sick person hangs from his arm;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	and another minister pulls the hand of the sick person downward toward the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the dislocation is too slight, one may use something heavy with it, and the dislocation will return immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And they reset it in another way:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	and they put a long charcoal in the ground, so that the shoulder is as hot as a pistol, neither too hot nor too cold;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	then it is placed under the patient, but he must have a woolen cloth over him, and the patient must be still from the long heat of the fire;
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then let his hand be extended downward on the opposite side, and the joint will return to its place gradually;
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	and if it does not want to return for all the things we have said, then do this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	take a brand two arms long and four fingers wide, which has its head pointed to go deep under the shoulder, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	then tie woolen cloth over the head of the brand so that the brand does not burn the patient, then put it under the shoulder of the patient;
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	and extends his arm above the long staff, and rests the shoulder on the staff, and the arm at the head of the hand, then places the arm on the sole of a large shoe, and the hand should be extended downward, and the body hanging from the other side:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	the joint will now return.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, however it may be, you should place under the shoulder blade a woolen sphere that is equal in size, then apply the prepared plaster of mill powder with incense and egg white over the entire shoulder and around it; then tighten it under the shoulder blade gradually, and tie the string onto the plaster, and hold the hand to their neck, and let the hand remain like this.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it is necessary that he eats little, until the limbs are comfortable, because he will heal faster;
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then eat more after 5 or 7 days, and move him;
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	and if he is stiff and not relaxed, then he is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has been dislocated due to moisture or any other cause, you should apply fire cautery at three openings, as described in the chapter on cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all this, and it dislocates after 7 days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot raise his arm upward, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened;
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	and know that the joint is never completely healed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	Dislocations that are towards the bottom, and in the breasts, or behind, are caused by pushing and stretching with the hands, and they are ministered to elsewhere.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing there is stiffness in the limb, and with movement it is delayed, then let the patient use the bath many times until that stiffness is alleviated and returns to its original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	from dislocation of the neck
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	Know that the joint of the neck is dislocated by fingers, and by fingers it is reset;
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	and if it is dislocated all over, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not reset, for one can see and feel it;
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	and is dislocated according to each form.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick armpit with the healthy one, then you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	Because the joint is stiff, and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And you should reset it as hot abscesses come, for if hot abscesses come, then it will be harmful to reset it;
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	and by chance it may not be able to be reset completely, especially when it is at the back;
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	It is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and sometimes brings about death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And the restoration, when it can be performed, is to extend the affected limb with both your hands:
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	and the arms should be stretched out, and the hands turned according to the cut, inside and outside, and the joint pushed back into its socket, or at the root of the palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he bends his hand towards his hand, and stretches from the root of the palm where it is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not return to its place, then apply strong extension:et li tiens la main que tu veis qu’ele soit adonsée de son leu a sa fin,
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and let one assistant hold the hand that you see is dislocated from its place to its end, and let two assistants stretch the arm, and let them hold it steady so it does not move during the extension;et li tu tiens la main que te veis qu’ele soit adonsée a son leu, et al
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	and you hold the hand that you see is dislocated, and then turn the arm in each direction after you have wrapped a long and wide cloth around it;et si est que un le tient en la main et al’auter en la palme, et li tiens les piés ou qu
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the physician examines a joint in his hand, he should apply oil to soften the joint, then bend it properly until it heals.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, he should apply a dry poultice with egg white, and hold it firmly, and bind the arm to the neck of the patient, and leave it for several days, then loosen it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is firm in its place, he should loosen the binding and leave it.
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	And if you see that the joint is not setting well, then restart the poultice and binding, and leave it for several days until it is firmly set.
puis le deslie.	Then loosen it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if he feels pain after the joint is reset and it moves, then bathe and massage it well, and press until the pain subsides.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	place a fatty lamb's tail on the joint, then leave it for a day and night, then remove it, and have the patient enter the bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	and when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the tail back on, and then enter the bath again;
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this two or three times until he is healed.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	if you see, place warm cow manure on it with butter and press it onto the joint;
si revenra a sa disposition.	it will return to its natural state.
li dislocation de la main	dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	Healing of the hand's joint is quick, more so than other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	Nevertheless, it must be reset gently, in the same hour that it was dislocated, so that the joint does not become swollen or develop a hot abscess.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the reset is that you place the affected hand on a table, and someone pulls the hand, and you check to make sure it's even, and then press down on the area around the joint so that it returns to its natural state.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	Nevertheless, you must check if it is in its proper place.
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Then have the patient lie on his back on a table and stretch out his arm.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, then have the patient lay his hand flat on a table, and with his other hand he should press down on the area around the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it goes back into place now, that is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, apply soothing poultices to the joint and leave it be without moving it again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back into place after a few days, then the joint will remain dislocated.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	And it does not harm the patient as long as the limb is weakened and he cannot use his hand for anything:
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	then you know that the nerves are cut or the arteries.
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	There is nothing else to do except to cauterize the area around the joint, and perhaps there is no other cure.S’il le fait, il est a l’homme; si non, il doit morier.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, then put on the plaster that we have described, then constrict it and leave it for .v. days, then loosen it and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is any swelling, then wet it with warm water and rub it until it is healed.Et s’il en a une grante, si le remede est que li mains se tienne au chaud sus la grieteit, et qu’il soit eslongeit tant qu’il soit sanez; car li membres longes sont plus tost sanaiz que li courts.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on either side, sometimes at the back of the palm or the palm itself.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then pull on the finger, and push the joint back into place as far as it will go, then hold the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part that is dislocated.
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	And leave it for two days, then put it in a sling for one day.
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	And bind it up at night as we have said, and loosen it during the day, and make it move, then rebind it at night.
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And do this often until it is healed, and do the same if it is dislocated at the back of the hand, and do as before until it is healed.
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And do likewise if it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	from the dislocation of the skull from the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the skull at the back or neck is dislocated, there are several dislocations, and there is no cure, for death hastens the illness.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the signs are that the bowels move without any voluntary effort, and one cannot hold it back, and often a limb becomes paralysed, in either arm or leg.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And many times there are three openings in the scrotum;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	the one that opens at the back is called "gilbositez":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	if you find that the gilbositez has come from childhood, then:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	there is no treatment or cure for it whatsoever.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancients described many ways to treat it with great detail, but there is not much benefit in all of that.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have summarized it according to my understanding and created instruments in various forms.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that there is no healing or health in the gilbositeit that comes on the front toe;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also that which comes straight in two places, and cannot be cured other than properly cutting away the one that comes on the back, as I said;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the patient be stretched out on his face in one place, and have a restraint under him so that he does not hurt himself;
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then insert a firebrand into the head in the ground, and another at the feet, and tie one string under the armpits of the patient, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	and two attendants hold the strings, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two firebrands;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and they are to be tied firmly, the firebrand as we have said, and the attendant puts his palms on the spine, until it straightens out.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not straighten out with this treatment, take a table three yards long, and lay it under the patient's back, and the patient should be on his side, and place the head of the table under the back, then place the middle of the table on the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and place his feet on the other end of the table, pressing hard until he returns to his original position.
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if you see that it happens in the shoulder joint which turns toward the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And you should place two coals on the head of the sick person's shoulder with one arm long, and towards the feet, two others, and there should be between each coal, above and below, a palm width of space.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	And in each coal, there should be a hole where the shoulder joint turns, and the coals should be firmly fixed in the ground so that they do not move;
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	And between each two coals, there should be a turning coal, over which the shoulder joint turns, and there should be two small coals in the turnings, each one a palm's width long, to turn the joint;
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	Then tie the string which is among the coals to the joint toward the head, and the other string toward the feet to the other joint, and each assistant turns their joint all along the string, and the master puts the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, then apply a desiccant poultice with an abundance of egg, and then the sponges, and then the cloth of a tablet three fingers wide, which covers the area of the hunchback and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage, as we have said, and use the patient's subtle cooling treatment until he is healed.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	And if nothing helps to restore health, then one must administer softening and soothing medicines, with the cloth that we have mentioned earlier.
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	And sometimes a lump appears in the lower spine of the back, and one thinks it is a dislocation.
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	And it is the bone that protrudes, so one must not be presumptuous about it:
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	For perhaps it would bring about death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	Know that only dislocations occur at the hip and shoulder joints, not as in other joints.
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	within and without, and before and behind;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	and more within than without, and less dislocated before and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the recognition of its dislocation within is that when one joins the affected leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the knee of the affected leg appears more open than the healthy one, and the affected person cannot bend their knee towards the fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and the place that is nearest to them is swollen with a hot abscess, because the shoulder of the thigh comes near it.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes in defense, it is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs of which occurs at the front, are that their leg is well according to its completion;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	Nevertheless, do not bend the knee without pain, and if one wishes to make it walk, it cannot move forward, and it holds back its urine, and the ankle swells, and when it walks, it drags its foot.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who happens behind, it is that he cannot extend his knee, nor double it, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the veins are softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The cause of this kind of dislocation is that you must first examine whether the dislocation is recent or old and remaining in its original position; if there is no treatment,
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	then one should not be careless.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in those with a recent dislocation, which is one of the four types of dislocations, you should quickly put the joint back into place, and push it inside and out, and move it to the right and left;
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	perhaps it will return to its place without needing further treatment.Or si tu voels que li dislocations soit aler a la fin, si covient que li dislocation soit fresche
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, you should prepare a strong bandage and extend the leg strongly with two hands, or tie it to the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	and another minister extends his hand above it in such a way that he squeezes his hands under his armpits, then tightens a cord around the thigh;
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another ties the head with a string;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they stretch him upwards and downwards all at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension applies to all four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, that is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If not, then you must put a bandage on his head.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is in the shoulder, you must support the patient on his healthy side, then place the band around the root of the thigh, and around the area under the armpit; then tighten the band above the armpit, towards the arm pit, and towards the armpit;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	then have another minister hold his arms, and embrace the thick part of the dislocated thigh, and stretch it forcefully:
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	then return to its place now;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this type of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot reset it in the manner we have described, then you should tie the patient's two feet together with a strong silk cord above the heels, and above the knees, and the affected leg should be extended two fingers more than the other;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	then let him be hung from the end of a pole, with his arms outstretched for a long time;
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	then instruct an assistant to grab the top of the thigh, and have another assistant suspend with the patient, holding the thigh firmly, for the joint will return quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is reset, then have the patient lie down as we have said for those with gout, and tighten the ligature on the affected leg properly, and on the foot as well;
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	then put two coals, one on the head and one at the feet, then place the coal between the buttocks of the patient in the wound.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and have wet cloths placed around it so that the patient does not feel the heat, then extend each limb towards him, and the helper holds the dislocated joint in his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns to its place, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put him on a table and press it as we have said in the case of dislocation, and lay the patient on his healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is in front, one should stretch the leg of the patient slowly, and according to what I have said;
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	and the helper puts his weight on the sore joint, then presses with the other hand, and they stretch it down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is on the outside, one should not stretch it down or lift it up, but it must be as though the hip were dislocated to the outside, as we have said about lying on two hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and let it be on his face, and the bandage extended as we have said before, and one should press upon the joint at the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	and it will be straight when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even;
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	then adjust the thighs, and apply the ointment, and restrain it with a bandage so that the hip does not move;
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	and let him rest for 3 or 4 days, then release it, and apply the ointment again;
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	and if you see that they are even, then restrain it as before, and let him be for 3 days;
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	then release it, and make him walk comfortably until the limb is restored.
de la dislocation dou genoil	On dislocation of the knee:
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The knee is dislocated in 3 ways:La prima, quant le capet del la cuisse entre en l’estremeite del gen
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	The first, when the head of the thigh enters into the extreme part of the knee, that is to say, within and without, and behind;La seconde, quant il est
et ne desalue point devant.	and do not dislodge it beforehand.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the sign is that you command the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not straighten at the thigh, know that it is dislocated;
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all [dislocations] is that you make the patient sit up straight, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back to his face, and put his foot on your feet;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	then take his knee in your palms, and pull apart with your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee joint;
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	and another assistant extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he straightens his leg at the thigh easily;
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and put the plaster on, and straighten the leg at the thigh, and bind them together tightly for three or four days, then loosen it;
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and do not have the patient exert themselves until their limbs are conforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the member is not at all, then administer a very strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	Heels are sometimes smashed, and sometimes completely dislocated, both internally and externally.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and tender in front at the place where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	the movements are light, and one should slightly extend the wrist in their hands when it is only sprained.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated from all sides, one must have the patient sit upright, and hold the leg straight by the ankle, above the ankle:
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left twice, then extend it upwards, and push the foot upwards firmly;
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling on the foot;
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	if it goes back into place, that is good;si elle ne veut revenir, tu le faices aler de
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	if it does not go back into place, have the patient walk around a bit, then try again, for it will go back into place;si elle ne veut revenir, tu prends
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if he cannot return in this way, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and firmly drive a stake into the ground between his buttocks, and wind cloth around it, so that he does not slip away.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then have one assistant hold the thigh, and another stretch out the leg with his hand or with a cord, tying it around the neck of the foot.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then each assistant stretches him equally, and the stake is driven in between the patient's buttocks to hold him when he is stretched.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then put your hands on the dislocation and have one assistant hold the healthy leg, and the dislocation will return easily.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is in place, put the plaster and bandages on tightly, and hold the foot firmly to the leg, being careful not to press too hard on the nerves behind the ankle.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	then let it rest for two or three days, and if the ligature softens, then tighten it.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	then untie it on the third or fourth day, and let the patient go about their business for four days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if he goes before that time, it is not certain that he will not relapse.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a deep abscess forms, you must calm it down as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	of the armpit
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the arms are dislocated, they should be stretched without force, and that is a minor matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in the lower back or foot, you should have the patient lie flat on his back or on a table, completely straight, and place your foot on the affected area, then press firmly with your foot until it pops back into place;
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	and when it is even and nothing sticks out, place a two-legged table under the foot, then tighten it firmly, and let it rest for three days, then untie it.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let him rest until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound occurs with a dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, many times the patient dies.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow to anger, do not dare to proceed.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	And at the beginning of things, apply a hot poultice to an abscess, and leave the patient in God's hand if you see no hope of recovery.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	And when you see hope, reset the dislocated joint immediately so that the hot abscess can heal.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	And when the joint is reset, apply hot poultices to soothe the abscess and treat the wound with drying ointments as appropriate.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if there is a fracture and small broken bones, set the bones and follow what we have said for simple fractures:Quant li membres est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	And beware of entering the path of fear, according to what I have said, for it will benefit you according to your creator, and for the safety of your weapons and your body.
